Download imageCHARLOTTESVILLE, Va.,Jan. 30, 2013/PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- The University ofVirginia Darden Schoolof Business announces today thatJeanne Liedtka, United Technologies Corporation Professor of Business Administration, has received an honorary Medal of the Order ofAustralia(OAM) in the General Division for "her service to the development of leaders in the museum profession through the Museum Leadership Program."(Logo:http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20100916/DC66431LOGO)As a faculty member of the Getty Leadership Institute's flagship program for senior museum executives, Liedtka was first invited to teach Australian museum professionals in 1999. Since then, a series of Museum Leadership Programs have invited her back as a key presenter in courses for senior museum executives inAustralia."Professor Liedtka has inspired a whole generation of leaders and enhanced their capacity for strategic thinking and innovation," stated a release from the Governor-General of the Australian Government, who announced the honor. "She has made a major impact on how the Australian museum world operates today in guiding, influencing and mentoring over 200 participants of the program over the past 13 years."In February, the Australian Embassy ofWashington, D.C.will invite Liedtka to an investiture ceremony at which she will receive her insignia. The honor entitles Liedtka to use the post-nominal OAM."We applaud Jeanne on this extraordinary honor," said Darden'sDean Bob Bruner. "She is an exemplary teacher who brings energy and innovative ideas to every class and student she teaches. When we talk about world-class, transformational learning, we talk about learning with a teacher like Jeanne."Formerly executive director of the Darden School's Batten Institute for Entrepreneurship and Innovation, Liedtka teaches design thinking, innovation and organic growth in Darden's MBA and Executive Education programs. Her research focuses on how design thinking can be used to spark inclusive, strategic conversations about the future of an organization. In 2011, her book Designing for Growth: A Design Thinking Toolkit for Managers, co-authored withTim Ogilvie, won the 1800 CEO READ best management book of the year. Her previous book Catalyst: How You Can Become an Extraordinary Growth Leader withRobert RosenandRobert Wiltbankwas named one of BusinessWeek's best innovation books in 2009."Her style and the practical content taught in her classes," stated the Australian Government, "have been credited by many alumni as turning points in their professional careers."About the Darden School of BusinessTheUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business is one of the world's leading business schools, offering MBA, Ph.D. and Executive Education programs. The unique Darden experience combines the case study method, the highest-ranked faculty whose research advances global managerial practice and business education, and a tight-knit learning environment to develop principled and complete leaders who are ready to make an impact.Sharing via social media? Please consider tagging us: @DardenMBA on Twitter, UVA Darden School of Business on Facebook.This news release was issued on behalf of Newswise(TM). For more information, visithttp://www.newswise.com.SOURCEUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business