Download imageBENGALURU,March 7, 2013/PRNewswire/ --Sunstone (www.sunstone.in) is a Premier Management Program for Working IT/ITES Professionals inDelhi, Pune andBangaloreSunstone Business School, the leading specialized Management School for information technology professionals, today announced the launch of its Post Graduate Program in Management (PGPM) in Bengaluru. In last two years, Sunstone has created a premier management education option for high quality working professionals in technology industry. With problem-based learning as its core, Sunstone Business School is leading the way by ensuring that the future technology leaders receive the finest management education inIndia.(Logo:http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130124/586283)"Bengaluru is the largest hub for IT services, enterprise products, and consumer companies and has huge talent pool of high quality technology professionals. We had been getting a lot of interest from Bengaluru for past 2 years, and we are now pleased to announce the launch of our program here," said Mr.Rajul Garg, Director, Sunstone Business School.Sunstone Business School in Bengaluru will offer the PGPM program, which delivers 750 hours of learning that includes 15-17 full weekend contact days and the remaining online. The program provides detailed learning on matters like Financial Analysis, Organizational Management, Marketing and Product Management, Entrepreneurship, Business Strategy etc. Sunstone graduates have successfully transitioned into senior business roles such as Product Management, Consulting, Business Development in tech-centric industry. The first Bengaluru batch will start from4 May 2013, and is expected to be a very small batch through invitation and referral only."Success of Sunstone PGPM depends on the future career path of our students, and hence it is imperative to identify right kind of students for the program. We are the only program for working professionals inIndiathat focuses on placement and career transition. Almost all of our students have changed their career trajectory significantly after the program by getting into business roles as well as entrepreneurship. We will limit our first batch in Bengaluru to 10 students only," said Mr. Garg.Currently, Sunstone is running batches inDelhiandPune. The batch sizes are small (25-50 students) and includes working professionals between 6-12 years of experience from technology companies such as IBM, Adobe, Sapient, Symantec, Infoedge as well as entrepreneurs.About Sunstone Business SchoolSunstone (www.sunstone.in) is a Premier Management Program for working IT/ITES professionals inDelhi, Pune andamp; Bangalore. Sunstone admits high quality students (http://sunstone.in/management-program/sunstone-business-school/meet-the-class/) from technology background and help them transition into senior business roles. With problem based learning as its core, Sunstone Business School is ensuring that the future technology leaders receive the most applicable and practicable management education inIndia. Sunstone runs small batches (25-50) that are coached by some top notch faculty and professionals fromHarvard, McKinsey, BCG, INSEAD etc.For more information, e-mail atcontactus@sunstone.inPrimary Media Contact:Dinesh Singh,dinesh@sunstone.in, 91-9871743222Secondary Media Contact: Paras Gupta,paras@sunstone.in, 91-9873805309SOURCE Sunstone Business School