BOSTON,Feb. 11, 2013/PRNewswire/ --Aquent, the leading global staffing organization dedicated to marketing, creative, and digital professionals, and its new divisionVitamin T, announced today that they have been named to Inavero's2013 Best of Staffing™ Talentlist of award winners. The companies received the Best Job Candidate Experience honor for their exceptional service to digital, creative, and marketing professionals. This year's list highlights a growing divide among the staffing industry's leaders and laggards, identifying Aquent and Vitamin T the most effective agencies for candidate job placement."As a talent-focused staffing company, we are so proud to win this award because we're always providing innovative ways to give our digital, creative, and marketing talent a great experience," saidAnn Webster, president of Aquent. "Last year, we became the first staffing agency to offer a massive online open course (MOOC), providing free HTML 5 training to all. But we didn't stop there; we created a mobile app with check-in and timecard functionality, increased our referral payouts and launched expert technical interviews for Front End Developers.""At Vitamin T, we've found some creative ways for our talent to have fun while also growing their careers," SaidSusie Hall, President of Vitamin T. "We're happy to show our fantastictalent how much we appreciate them by giving them a blog filled with useful content for digital creatives, fast access to our staff, and a social network with information and access to other creatives."Less than one percent of all staffing agencies inNorth Americareceive the Best of Staffing award for service excellence. Utilizing the Net Promoter® methodology, the 2013 Best ofStaffing Talentwinners achieved satisfaction scores more than double the industry average. This stark contrast in scores is a clear indication that the firms who have earned their way onto the 2013 Best ofStaffing Talentlist truly stand out for their service quality. Aquent received satisfaction ratings of 9 or 10 out of 10, from 73 percent of their permanent and temporary employees, significantly higher than the industry's average of 48 percent."Few things are more important to companies than the employees you hire," said Inavero Founder and CEOEric Gregg. "The same holds true for candidates on their quest for employment. Staffing agencies have proven to successfully connect companies with permanent and temporary employees. Since the end of the recession, the staffing and recruiting industry has created more jobs than any other single industry in the country**, yet so many companies and job seekers don't take advantage of this expertise and resource. Our hope is that both companies and job candidates use the Best of Staffing lists as a benchmark to help select a staffing agency that can either secure the talent or employment opportunity they need."®Net Promoter, NPS, and Net Promoter Score are trademarks of Satmetrix Systems, Inc., Bain andamp; Company, andFred Reichheld. Net Promoter Score is calculated by taking the percentage of respondents who, on a scale of 0 to 10, rate their likelihood to recommend the staffing agency with a score of 9 or 10 (promoters) and subtracting the percentage who rate the staffing agency a 6 or lower (detractors).**Bureau of Labor StatisticsAbout AquentAt its core, Aquent is about helping companies adapt to change, find new ways to work, and stay competitive. Aquent offers a broad range of services, including contract and contract-to-hire staffing to help global companies add technical expertise to their marketing and creative departments, increase the bandwidth of their in-house teams, and more. With a notable client list, generous benefits and training opportunities, Aquent attracts and places thousands of in-demand talent on assignment worldwide. To learn more about Aquent's full range of services, please visit:http://aquent.com/About InaveroInaveroadministers more staffing agency client and talent satisfaction surveys than any other firm in the world.  Inavero's team reports on satisfaction surveys from more than 500,000 staffing agency clients and talent each year and the company serves as the AmericanStaffing Association's exclusive research partner.About Inavero's Best of Staffing AwardInavero'sBest of Staffing™is the nation's only award that recognizes staffing agencies that receive remarkable reviews from their clients and the people they help find jobs (employed talent). The Best of Staffing winner lists are a central place that businesses and talent go to find the best staffing agencies to call when they are in need.ContactKelly KaneSHIFT Communicationsaquent@shiftcomm.com(617) 779-1866SOURCE  AquentRELATED LINKShttp://www.aquent.com