Download imageNEW DELHI,March 22, 2013/PRNewswire/ --Sunstone Business School (www.sunstone.in), Leading Specialized Management School for Working Professionals in Technology Industry Announces Partnership With Saylor.org, Leader in the Open Education MovementSunstone Business School, the leading specialized management school, today announced the partnership with Saylor.org, a large US-based non-profit organization and a respected leader in the Open Education Movement, established in 2008. Saylor offers more than 280 online courses to several million students globally. Through this partnership both Sunstone and Saylor aim to share educational resources to enhance participant reach and enrich the course experience. The course in partnership offered is "Being an effective new leader" where Sunstone would leverage Saylor content and develop it in its unique pedagogy to enrich the experience of course participants. Saylor.org course participants of "Management Leadership - BUS401" can now experience the course in an interactive format through Sunstone Massive Open Online Courses (MOOC).(Logo:http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130124/586283)"We believe that education for professionals should be continuous and flexible through collaboration and problem solving. Our platform and our problem based pedagogy enables professionals to learn by doing by self and collaboration. We are very excited to leverage Saylor content for leadership course and develop them into interactive problems. This would enable professionals to get richer learning experience through collaborative learning. We intend to further strengthen this partnership in future for other open courses," saysMegha Khatri, Program Manager, Sunstone Business School."We're pleased to work together with Sunstone to provide new student pathways and develop innovative solutions toward increased access to higher education," saysAlana Harrington, Program Director, Saylor.org.Sunstone Business School MOOC, is the fastest growing MOOC in management discipline. Several thousands of professionals are currently enrolled into various open courses and learning concepts through the innovative problem based learning approach. Through its MOOC, Sunstone aims to strengthen its capabilities in management and bring a paradigm shift in the way management education is deliverable today inIndia. The pillars of its success are its pedagogy, and the technology that enables them to offer courses that facilitate collaborative learning. "This partnership would enable the participants to experience richer quality of content through problem based learning," says Mr.Rajul Garg, Director, Sunstone Business School.About Sunstone Business SchoolSunstone Business School (www.sunstone.in) is the leading specialized management school for working professionals in technology industry. Sunstone's one year Post Graduate Program in Management has gained recognition as a premier MBA program accepted by the industry. The school's problem based pedagogy offers students a robust grounding in business strategies and implementation.To know more about the MOOC please visit: http://sunstone.in/management-program/open-courses/For more info, write toopencourses@sunstone.inAbout Saylor.orgMr. Saylor created the Foundation because he had a very simple, very earnest, and very bold idea: education should be free. Since 2008, the Foundation's free education initiative (www.saylor.org) has focused on exploring the promise of the Internet to drive the cost of education to zero and expand access to quality open educational resources (OER). Toward this end, we have built over 280 free, self-paced, online courses, with many more on the way.To know more about Saylor.org please visithttp://www.saylor.org/about/Primary Media Contact:Dinesh Singh,dinesh@sunstone.in, 91-9871743222Secondary Media Contact:Megha Khatri,megha.khatri@sunstone.in, 91-8800393805SOURCE Sunstone Business School