CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va.,Nov. 19, 2012/PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- TheUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business today announced that the MeadWestvaco (MWV) Foundation has provided founding support for Darden's Initiative for Business in Society (IBiS). MWV's CEO and ChairmanJohn A. Luke Jr.will serve on the IBiS Advisory Committee.The Darden research Center of Excellence, launched inOctober 2011, explores business' role in society and the issues that impact the dynamics between business, government and society. The center's mission is to be a leading global catalyst and convener of thought, information and action at the interface of business and society."We are incredibly grateful for MWV's support as a founding corporate partner and look forward to our important work ahead," saidDarden Dean Bob Bruner. "IBiS is the first center of its kind at a leading global business school to focus on the intersection of business and society in alliance with global corporations. MWV's insights as a global packaging solutions company will be highly valuable as we execute an ambitious research agenda."MWV is widely recognized for its efforts in sustainability and its commitment to the communities in which it does business. In 2011, the company was listed for the eighth consecutive year on the Dow Jones Sustainability World Index for its commitment to and success in integrating sustainability into core business objectives and performance. Since 2003, the MeadWestvaco Foundation has given more than$36 millionand employees have volunteered half a million hours to sustainable communities, environmental stewardship and education. The company's size and global reach position it at the leading edge of business; MWV works closely with customers, consumers and communities around the globe."As a global company, we work with our customers to develop innovative packaging solutions that address challenges shaped by economic, cultural and political forces in more than 100 countries around the world," saidJohn A. Luke Jr, chairman and CEO, MWV. "Beyond sustainability and corporate social responsibility, truly understanding the interconnectedness of business and society is essential to drive profitable growth, encourage innovation and benefit communities. MWV is honored to partner with Darden to continue to evolve our understanding of the role of business in society."In addition to developing new knowledge, IBiS will prepare leaders to better understand how business and society mutually engage in value-added opportunities. The center will equip these leaders with the skills they need to navigate challenges and deliver value in an increasingly complex world.Luke will serve on the IBiS Advisory Committee, along with executives of founding corporate partners -- including Amgen and Northrop Grumman --Darden Dean Bob Brunerand members of Darden's faculty. The committee shapes IBiS's suite of activities, which include:Conferences and events with a wide range of leaders that will present insights, strategies and leading practicesNew case studies published by Darden Business Publishing and used in classrooms and organizations around the worldNew courses taught in the three formats of the Darden MBA: MBA, MBA for Executives and Global MBA for Executives, and in Darden Executive EducationResearch that will explore how business, government and society can work together toward common goals, such as addressing risk and creating value for societySince its founding, IBiS has published new case studies, sponsored U.Va. conferences for students, executives and policy thought leaders, and developed a multimedia series, Viewpoints on Business in Society, featuring perspectives from a cross section of Darden's top-ranked faculty."The corporate support and close collaboration of MWV will provide critical insights into the issues and leading practices of the consumer goods sector and the packaging and container industry," saidDean Krehmeyer, executive director of IBiS. "Together, we will work to expand IBiS' influence and make a real-time, positive impact on the areas where business, government and society intersect."About theUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of BusinessTheUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business is one of the world's leading business schools, offering MBA, Ph.D. and Executive Education programs. The unique Darden experience combines the case study method, the highest-ranked faculty whose research advances global managerial practice and business education, and a tight-knit learning environment to develop principled and complete leaders who are ready to make an impact.About the MeadWestvaco FoundationGuided by principles established more than 50 years ago, the MeadWestvaco Foundation promotes sustainable communities, education and environmental stewardship worldwide and encourages employee volunteer participation. Operating in MWV communities, the Foundation partners with both national and local organizations. And through its purposeful involvement since 2003, these programs have benefited from more than$36 millionin strategic grants. In addition, employees have given more than 572,000 hours to over 3,000 programs. For more information on the many ways in which the MeadWestvaco Foundation gives back, please visitwww.mwvfoundation.com.This news release was issued on behalf of Newswise(TM). For more information, visithttp://www.newswise.com.Media Contacts:Abena Foreman-Triceforemantricea@darden.virginia.eduSOURCEUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business