Download imageFARMINGTON, Conn.,April 3, 2013/PRNewswire-iReach/ -- Driven by a myriad of powerful market forces and a broken cost model, massively open online courses (MOOCs) are shaping the higher education industry. MOOCs will changehow higher education is paid for in the future, but the models and monetization strategies are still unclear. If the rise of MOOCs means higher education will be increasingly commoditized and nudge prices on a downward trend, this might spell trouble for traditional brick and mortar institutions. Naturally, these institutions will need to develop their own online programs and courses to stay competitive.(Photo:http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130403/CG88145)On the consumer side the trade-offs are clear: what online learning lacks in the "human element", it makes up for in terms of convenience and flexibility. On the supplier side, education technology vendors – Blackboard, Coursera, edX, Instructure, Khan Academy, Knewton, and Udacity – are scrambling to capture new opportunities in the fast-growing MOOC trend.Global Information Inc is pleased to offer new market research reports covering the changing education industry from both technological and financial standpoints.Next in the Evolution of Distance Learning: Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs)How will MOOCs shape the higher education industry? How can existing education technology vendors extend their offerings to include MOOCs? Ovum's new report examines the implications of creating and using MOOCs in higher education, highlights the pros and cons of MOOCs for both institutions and vendors, and offers recommendations for institutions and technology vendors on how to approach MOOC opportunities.This report covers key messages MOOCs have for the higher education industry. To view a full table of contents, or to download free sample pages from the full report, please visithttp://www.giiresearch.com/report/ov264836-next-evolution-distance-learning-massively-open.htmliPads andamp; Smartphones in K-12 SchoolsThe market is molding today's youth to become tomorrow's consumer. Technology vendors are advocating the benefits of eLearning initiatives and progressive K-12 school districts are moving toward 1:1 initiatives in which every student is provided with his or her own internet-ready device. However, adoption is still in the early stages due to weaker spending on eLearning initiatives. On average, there are three students to every one computer or computer device in US classrooms today.One of the largest hurdles for getting mobile technology into classrooms is the lack of infrastructure in many K-12 schools. Most mobile devices require sufficient broadband technology and wireless connections to support hundreds of students, teachers and administrators on the Internet.This report outlines the changes underway in US K-12 classrooms with regard to mobile technology. Apple's iPad and Google's Chromebook are highlighted as two potential devices that schools may wish to consider in their mobile technology selection process. The study details key success factors that are critical when introducing mobile technology into K-12 schools, including infrastructure, device management, software updates, technical support, deployment and management, and pricing/total cost of ownership.Read more or request a free sample from the full report athttp://www.giiresearch.com/report/gat262297-ipads-smartphones-k-12-schools.htmlFind more market research for the connected car and telematics industriesWith nearly 30 years of market research experience,Global Information, Inc(GII) is the single best resource for companies entering new markets, expanding their business, and securing their positions in their respective industries. With tens of thousands of reports from over 400 publishers in nearly every vertical market, our market research and forecast data can give companies the edge they need to stay ahead of the competition and plan for every contingency.The reports above are just a few examples from the hundreds of research reports we have available for theconnected car and telematics markets. For a free consultation on the market research you need,contact ustoday!About Global Information Inc.Global Information (GII) (http://www.giiresearch.com) is an information service company partnering with over 300 research companies around the world. Global Information has been in the business of distributing technical and market research for more than 25 years. Expanded from its original headquarters inJapan, Global Information now has offices in Korea,Taiwan,Singapore,Europeandthe United States.Media Contact:Jeremy Palaia Global Information, Inc., 1-860-674-8796,Press@gii.co.jpNews distributed by PR Newswire iReach:https://ireach.prnewswire.comSOURCE  Global Information, Inc.RELATED LINKShttp://www.giiresearch.com