Download imageCHARLOTTESVILLE, Va.,Feb. 4, 2013/PRNewswire-USNewswire/ --  AUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business study finds that American CEOs are worth their paychecks.(Logo:http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20100916/DC66431LOGO)The number of zeros in paychecks of American CEOs often comes under fire. Many believe that American CEOs take home too much money. American workers who face stagnant to lowering wages in a tough economy have argued the point, as have professional firms, which emphasize that CEOs in America earn more than their counterparts abroad.Do they?"No," said Darden ProfessorPedro Matos. In his upcoming paper, "Are U.S. CEOs Paid More? New International Evidence," Matos and his colleagues investigated CEO salary data from more than 1,600 U.S. and international firm across 13 European countries. Without the limitations of past domestic and global compensation disclosure rules, the researchers learned not only do American CEOs earn salaries comparable to those of international CEOs, but many U.S. CEOs earn a portion of their pay based on the value they create for shareholders.The results will appear in a future edition of The Review of Financial Studies.Matos reported in "Harvard Law School Forum on Corporate Governance and Financial Regulation" blog that paychecks of U.S. CEOs are quite reasonable. He took into account characteristics such as board structure, firm type and ownership structure."Initially, U.S. CEO salaries appear twice as large as salaries of CEOs in other countries, but one is really comparing apples to oranges due to differences in the way that U.S. firms operate compared to their international counterparts," said Matos.According to Matos, American-based firms lean toward institutional ownership and independent boards, which leads to better oversight."We think it's a sign of good corporate governance when firms are monitored closely by institutional owners as well as independent board members. These push for CEO pay to be tied to shareholder performance," said Matos. "It should cause us to question the belief that U.S. CEO pay is excessive."Matos' study also shows that competitive international firms now offer CEO salary packages that are comparable to those from U.S. firms."Many of the non-U.S. firms vie for the same capital, customers and talent as U.S. firms that operate globally," Matos added. "We feel that our research presents grounds for critics to take a second look at U.S. CEO salaries."Nuno Fernandes, professor of finance at IMD Business School;Miguel A. Ferreira, professor of finance at Nova School of Business and Economics; andKevin J. Murphy, professor of finance at theUniversity of Southern California,Marshall Schoolof Business, were co-investigators for this project.Matos' research focuses on international corporate governance and the growing importance of institutional investors in financial markets worldwide.For questions or information, contactcommunication@darden.virginia.eduor a member of the Communication team.About the Darden School of BusinessTheUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of Business is one of the world's leading business schools, offering MBA, Ph.D. and Executive Education programs. The unique Darden experience combines the case study method, the highest-ranked faculty whose research advances global managerial practice and business education, and a tight-knit learning environment to develop principled and complete leaders who are ready to make an impact.Sharing via social media? Please consider tagging us: @DardenMBA on Twitter, UVA Darden School of Business on Facebook.This news release was issued on behalf of Newswise(TM). For more information, visithttp://www.newswise.com.SOURCEUniversity of VirginiaDarden School of BusinessRELATED LINKShttp://www.darden.virginia.edu