Orlando, Fla.
Many graduate-school admissions counselors aren't sure if they are ready for massive open online courses, attendees at an annual conference here said, or for the ways those courses could change both their jobs and their universities' advanced-degree programs.
There seemed to be more questions than answers at a session about what the courses, known as MOOCs, might mean for the future of graduate education. "MOOCs are still very new to us," said Christine Noyes, a graduate-enrollment-services adviser at the University of Washington. "We have to figure out how to adapt."
The four-day conference, held by NAGAP, the Association for Graduate Enrollment Management, drew more than 900 attendees. Among the other topics they discussed were declining enrollments, high attrition and program cuts in a bad economy, the best uses of social media for recruiting, and how growing questions about the value of advanced degrees are affecting admissions counselors' ability to market their institutions' graduate programs.
Joanne Canyon-Heller, a board member at the national association and the assistant vice president for graduate and global recruitment at Roosevelt University, led the conversation about MOOCs. She started the session by asking the audience a string of questions: "Are we ready for MOOCs to come into graduate education, and what's it going to mean for our jobs? Will MOOCs work in master's and doctorate programs, or will they just blow over? How will they change faculty and student interactions? If MOOCs allow thousands of students to take courses, will too much quality be sacrificed for quantity?"
When Ms. Canyon-Heller asked the roughly 50 people in the room if their institutions offered graduate courses in the form of MOOCs, only one person raised a hand. But some people said conversations about whether to offer graduate-level courses as MOOCs, and experiments to test how that might work, have begun.
A few audience members shared stories about how MOOCs had crashed within a few weeks, and those courses had been canceled because their campuses did not have the proper technology to support hundreds of thousands of students. Others said that the completion rate for MOOCs had been lower than in other kinds of courses, and that student participation in the courses had often been relatively weak.
A 'Stigma' Against Online ProgramsSome admissions counselors said that, despite a continued push for online degrees in recent years, a stigma is still associated with them, especially at the graduate level. Employers tend to look less favorably on job applicants who received most of their advanced education through an online format, some of the session's attendees said, than on those who earned their graduate degrees at a brick-and-mortar university. People said they were uncertain whether MOOCs would be embraced by faculty members, employers, and state-licensing boards.
Attendees said that MOOCs could be a good way to lower costs for students and to open access to education more broadly. But not enough is known, many said, about how the quality and effectiveness of MOOCs stacked up to more-traditional courses.
Robert Sommo, assistant dean for enrollment services at New York University, said that it was a "dangerous and scary environment right now" in which to introduce MOOCs. "A lot of these questions are based on money and not on what students are actually learning."
Some audience members focused on the potential downsides of MOOCs for graduate programs. They said MOOCs were not equivalent to traditional courses, particularly in the kinds of interactions they foster between students and professors.
With MOOCs, Ms. Canyon-Heller said, "faculty will no longer know their students' names or faces."
"Students will be numbers if classes rise to thousands," she continued. "Instructors will be known as a voice over a downloaded file more than a mentor."
She and others said that opportunities for classroom discussion, which are hallmarks of graduate seminars, would be significantly limited. Graduate students would not be able to obtain the same kinds of letters of recommendation that they would from an in-classroom professor with whom they had worked closely. Nor would they gain the benefits of communicating with diverse groups of people face to face, attendees said, and employers already complain that graduate schools need to do a better job of teaching students how to communicate and work in teams.
Ms. Canyon-Heller also wondered how people with learning disabilities would be able to get the help they needed in a MOOC format.
On the other hand, she said, the format might help some students who struggle in the classroom, such as those who face anxiety in social situations or who have been the victims of bullying.
Potential Benefits of MOOCsAudience members pointed out other ways that MOOCs might benefit both professors and students. Professors at elite institutions would have the opportunity to teach thousands of students instead of just the privileged few. And MOOCs could be confidence builders for people who might think they don't have what it takes to go to graduate school.
One person suggested that graduate schools or others could offer preparatory courses in the form of MOOCs to help students learn how to submit stronger applications and build their writing skills.
When asked how MOOCs might affect how graduate students are prepared for their potential future roles as professors, Linda Lacey, dean of the graduate school at New Mexico State University, said that students at her institution are required to take courses that prepare them to teach in both traditional classroom settings and online to students they will never see.
There seemed to be a consensus in the room that, though there is some uncertainty about the future, there's no need for graduate schools to have an identity crisis over MOOCs. "MOOCs can be the icing on the cake," said one person sitting in the back of the room, "but they won't replace the traditional classroom."
Attendees also said it was good to get the conversation started. "We took MOOCs out of the darkness so we can see how to make them an opportunity," Ms. Canyon-Heller said, "rather than something we fear."
Stacey Patton