pAn Internet class promising to teach its 40,000 students how to create their own massively open online course hit a snag on Sunday: It crashed.
Beyond the obvious irony, the miscue, which involved a Georgia Institute of Technology course hosted by the online learning platform Coursera, highlights the growing pains of online education.
"When someone first invented the book, someone had to invent the table of contents, the page numbers, the section headings," said Andrew Ng, co-founder of Coursera. "We're in the process of inventing those right now, and there will be missteps along the way."
The six-week course, called "Fundamentals of Online Education: Planning and Application," was created by Fatimah Wirth, a Georgia Tech instructional designer. The emphasis of the course, which began on Jan. 28, was to teach students how to create online learning materials and manage an online class.
Students were asked to sign up for groups using Google Docs, but a spokesman for Google Inc. said the program allows only 50 people to edit a document simultaneously. When the crush of students tried to sign up, the system crashed, said Debbie Morrison, who was in the class.
Ms. Wirth emailed an apology, but when things didn't improve she, in conjunction with Georgia Tech and Coursera, pulled the plug on the course.
The cancellation sparked an outpouring of online ire even though the class was free. Ms. Morrison wrote on her blog: "How Not to Design aspan class="hit"MOOC/span: The Disaster at Coursera and How to Fix it."
"It was disorganized, it was not user friendly," she said. "Some of this is just trial and error, this wholespan class="hit"MOOC/spanthing is completely new and mistakes will get made, noted and people will improve."
"The Institute sincerely regrets this inconvenience and apologizes for any concern this might have caused," the school said in a statement. Ms. Wirth didn't return a phone call seeking comment.
Massively open online classes are in their infancy. Mr. Ng, a Stanford University computer scientist, offered one of the first in 2011 and announced the creation of Coursera last April. More than two million students have enrolled in 215 Coursera classes since then, with some drawing over 100,000 people.
The company teams with colleges and universities for content and offers loose guidance. Mr. Ng said experimentation has led to improvements and innovations, but there have been mistakes.
In the future, Coursera will ask professors for a little more time to review their classes before they go live, he said.
Subscribe to WSJ:
Credit: By Douglas Belkin/p