pThe rise of the massive open online course, orspan class="hit"MOOC/span, has given curious minds an outlet for learning despite time, space or financial constraints. But for many, including the Miser, nothing quite beats the real-time, physical presence of a mentor and peers. This weekend downtown Manhattan will host several symposiums that are free and open to the public, though reservations are required.
At the New School "The Feminine Mystique at 50," celebrating the publication of Betty Friedan's seminal book, will feature, among others, the biographer Susan Ware, who will give the keynote speech on Friday night and moderate a discussion on Saturday afternoon. Reservations: mystiqueat50.eventbrite.com.
(Friday from 3:30 to 8 p.m. and Saturday from 1 to 5 p.m.; 55 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village; thefemininemystique50.wordpress.com.)
"Aftertaste: The Atmosphere of Objects," organized by the School of Constructed Environments at Parsons, the New School for Design, examines the art of interior design from a theoretical perspective. "Object Histories," the 1:30 p.m. session on Saturday, features the architect and novelist Peter Wheelwright. Reservations: sce.parsons.edu.
(Friday from 6 to 8 p.m., Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; 66 Fifth Avenue, between 12th and 13th Streets; (212) 229-8955.)
The Festival Neue Literatur will present six German-language authors at events like "Closed Circuits: Shrunken Dystopias," on Saturday night at PowerHouse Arena in Dumbo, Brooklyn, and "Breaking Away: Contemporary Travelogues," on Sunday night at McNally-Jackson Books in SoHo. But also on Sunday the Miser has his eyes on "Frühschoppen: A Literary Brunch," hosted by New York University's Deutsches Haus, where the readings will be complemented by traditional German food. Reservations by e-mail: deutscheshaus.rsvp@nyu.edu.
(Sunday at noon; 42 Washington Mews, between East Eighth Street and Waverly Place, Greenwich Village; 212-998-8660; deutscheshaus.as.nyu.edu, festivalneueliteratur.org.)
PLAYING WITH PIXELS
The fate of the Sony Building, the postmodern office tower at 550 Madison Avenue, was recently sealed when it was sold to a developer who plans to convert it to residential and retail space. With Sony expected to vacate for new digs, it's less clear what will happen to the Sony Wonder Technology Lab, which provides free education and entertainment programming for all ages, so take advantage while you can.
On Saturday the lab features screenings of the futuristic romp "Robot andamp; Frank" at 12:15, and the Academy Award-winning Iranian film "A Separation" at 3 p.m. And for children there's the "Tech for Tots: Digital Storytelling" session at noon. Walk-up tickets are available but limited; reservations are strongly recommended.
(Tuesday through Saturday, 9:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; 550 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street; (212) 833-8100; sonywondertechlab.com.)/p