Los Angeles
Given the green credentials of Hunter Lovins, and given her audience's appetite for shaking up higher education, her keynote speech here at the annual conference of the Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education should have been a huge hit. She even promised to address one of the most popular topics in the industry right now:reinventing higher education.
She started off, at least, with an enthusiastic crowd. Ms. Lovins is regarded as something of a guru among sustainability people.Natural Capitalism,the book whose revised edition she wrote with the environmental entrepreneur Paul Hawken and Amory Lovins, an energy expert and her former husband, is considered essential reading.
After a talk that ranged across topics familiar to the crowd—the perils of climate change, the viability of renewable energy, the shortsightedness of government and corporate policies, and so on—she finally settled on the unsustainability of higher education.
"I think universities are at some risk of becoming irrelevant," she said. "Is TED the new Harvard?," she went on, referring to the conferences on big ideas. "Fast Companythinks so." She put special emphasis on aYouTube video,"The Future of Education: Epic 2020," that outlines a scenario, eight years hence, when colleges are kaput and tuition and degrees no longer exist. She cited Khan Academy. MOOC's. Students teaching students.
With college sticker prices and student loans going up, Ms. Lovins posited, "How about a world in which you don't pay tuition?"
'A Big Infomercial'There was some hooting and applause, but it seemed that many in the crowd were already wondering where Ms. Lovins was going with all this. Then she plugged her solution: an online app that would deliver lectures through video, developed as a partnership between Bainbridge Graduate Institute, where Ms. Lovins teaches; In the Telling, a video-software firm in Colorado, where Ms. Lovins lives; and her nonprofit organization, Natural Capitalism Solutions.
Many people in the crowd didn't like it, not one bit. The sustainability crowd tends to put a lot of value on the uniqueness of local approaches to problems and the solutions found in community members—the ways that people can marshal their individual strengths to contribute to the good of the whole. Ms. Lovins was presenting an industrialized vision of higher education—mass-produced knowledge. As Ms. Lovins played a sample video, another attendee leaned over to me and whispered: "This is like a big infomercial."
The association's conferences draw an unusually high number of students and recent graduates. A stereotype might dictate that such young people would be the most interested in a new, high-tech approach to teaching and learning. But as the students lined up to use microphones during a question-and-answer session, it was clear that they were skeptical.
"You talk about integrating the curriculum, bringing sustainability into all subjects, but how are kids going to do that when they are watching modules and videos?" one young man said. "How are you going to replace late-night dorm-room chats? We don't go to school to sit through lectures. Would we have our kids of the future learning through reading and typing and, like, developing no verbal skills?"
The crowd roared with approval. Another young man said that Ms. Lovins was merely proposing business solutions, when higher education's problems might require social solutions.
Ms. Lovins backpedaled a bit, saying that she wasn't presenting an "either/or" pitting video courses against traditional education. She noted that the video was a work in progress, and she said she welcomed the criticism. But she returned to the fictional "Epic 2020" video and its ominous predictions: "They say that universities are going away soon, that they will be warehouses for the children of the rich, specializing primarily in entertainment, good food, and athletics," she said. "This is what we are up against."
Scott Carlson