I recently attended the annual conference of the Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in Higher Education, in Los Angeles, which got me thinking about some of the ways the sustainability movement has affected academic hiring.
To me, as an academic leader, one of the most interesting things about the AASHE conference was how clearly it showed that sustainability as a discipline is, to borrow a term, a “digital native.” Much of the conference took place via social media, and it was apparent as well that developments in academic sustainability are moving in close parallel with discussions about the crisis in higher education, including discussions about cost, access, student-loan debt, and new forms of delivery such as MOOC’s, more basic online programs, various kinds of crowdsourcing, and new models such as Khan Academy.
These connections make sense because the major challenge to higher education right now is sustainability, not just in terms of our carbon footprint and consumption of resources such as water and land, but economically, too. In one workshop we were asked to provide our personal definitions of sustainability and, if we wanted, our institutional definitions as well, and then to reflect on the differences between them and why they were different.
Obviously, an institution cannot be sustainable in an ecological sense if it’s not sustainable in an economic sense, and all over the conference there were discussions about how to manage escalating costs while continuing to provide strong opportunities for students to learn what they need to learn to lead productive and satisfying lives. There was a considerable amount of alarm about the overall future of higher education in anything like its current form, and some concomitant speculation about what’s next for colleges and universities.
There are a lot of institutions making significant commitments to sustainability, from high-level formal ones such as theAmerican College andamp; University Presidents’ Climate Commitmentto the encouragement of student recycling clubs. In discussions about academic programs, much has been made of the fact that almost all the faculty involved have come from other disciplines, since sustainability itself hasn’t existed long enough as a discipline to generate many doctorates so far.
What is also clear from these academic discussions is that many new faculty positions will have some component of sustainability in them, whether it simply involves an interest in and commitment to sustainability as a campus and educational practice, or a direct contribution to the operation of the program in teaching, research, and administration. I think future job candidates with an interest in sustainability issues should strive to find ways to formalize that interest by engaging in activities that can be documented on a CV so they can make a case for their commitments at job-search time.
In the larger sense, while I am not convinced that some of the most alarmist conversations about the future of higher education are correct, it’s clear that we are in the midst of a huge change in our operations that is not, to be polite, going to favor the slow and unimaginative. Some of the paradigms of the sustainability movement—including access, distributed authority, and socially responsible engagement—are very likely to provide templates for the industry’s future, and as such what’s happening in AASHE is worth attending to even if sustainability itself is not your pressing interest.
This entry was posted inFaculty Hiring,General Interest. Bookmark thepermalink.David Evans