
Today doesn’t feellike a good dayfor glib banter leading in to a list of links, so let’s just get right to them:
Jim Groom looks at the Coursera hype in“We’ve been MOOCed”:The myth that this model will somehow replace institutions couldn’t be more evident from this set of quotes. But could it result in professors teaching leagues of students for no more money, and as a result fewer full-time tenured faculty in an already dismal pool of jobs? Yes. Is that good? No. I truly believe dismantling research and teaching institutions by ending tenured positions for the professorate poses deep risks to any nation’s freedom.Marilee Lindemann observes that a midcareer“self is not a tennis shoe”:Why, then, do I resist seeing rebranding as a solution to the challenges of mid-career slumps, funks, and stalls? It could simply be that I am reluctant, in this rare instance, to call a spade a spade. Denial aside, though, my resistance is also rooted in a desire for other ways of naming and framing our selves and our work lives.Sounding Out!‘s Aaron Trammell exploresembodiment, listening, and transcription:it is important to consider exactly what it means for the body to work as a medium of translation. What emotions can a song activate in my body, and how do these feelings become words, stored in the mnemonic confines of paper?Chad Black discusses his experiences in Udacity’s CS101 course, and reaches akey conclusion:It should be taken as a truism that if you are interested in learning in the MOOC setting of a udacity or coursera course, you must be willing to hone your google fu.Aaron Bady’s laptop was stolen,leading to a necessary, if depressing, rebalancing of everything:Rather than “do more with less,” and keep waking up at 2 a.m. in a panic over undone things,  therefore, I am going to do less with the less I have. Rather than fool myself into thinking I can just make it up magically, I am going to be realistic, and revise my plans and expectations according to my diminished pool of resources. I’ve lost time, work, and money and I need to make up the work without the money, so something’s got to give.In this week’s video, Howard Rheingold interviews David Preston about the ways he’s encouraging students tohack their curriculum:

Bonus:Stephen Downes explains the difference between aLearning Management System (LMS) and a Personal Learning Environment (PLE)(viaMichael Ritter).
Double-bonus:“Things Astronomers Say.”
Near-unprecedented triple-bonus: Yuvi Zalkowdiscusses time, choices, and project management.
Have a great weekend!
Photo“Park Benches”by Flickr userwanderingthinker/Creative Commons licensed BY-ND-2.0
This entry was posted inEditorialand taggedweekend reading. Bookmark thepermalink.Jason B. Jones