To the Editor:
Some higher-education pundits have predicted—and some administrators are concerned—that Massively Open Online Courses, or MOOCs, will change the higher-education terrain. It has been predicted that MOOCs will cause the closure of some of the universities and institutions of higher education that are operating today.
Worries about the future of higher-education institutions surfaced when 150,000 or more students enrolled in a popular MOOC.
I think that such predictions are way off the mark, because universities have survived the onslaught of what are known as BOOKs and even flourished by incorporating them into their core activities. Before the advent of the MOOCs, several popular text BOOKs have been published and adopted and used by faculty teaching similar courses all over the country. Some BOOKs have probably been read by millions of students. However, not all of them were enrolled in the same course at the same time. It is true that MOOCs enable large numbers of students to be enrolled in the same course at the same time.
Here is my prediction of the future of higher education in the era of MOOCs. Just like BOOKs, MOOCs will be incorporated into the core business of universities. But they will not cause universities to shut down.
Universities will shut down because they have become too expensive. They will shut down because there are too many universities competing with each other for students. Some of them will close their doors because of a loss of reputation as a result of offering too many online degree programs that do not adhere to rigorous academic policies, practices, and processes that ensure quality of face-to-face programs.
MOOCs may come and MOOCs may go, but higher-education institutions as they exist today will go on functioning, perhaps not forever, but definitely for many years to come.
M.O. ThirunarayananAssociate ProfessorLearning Technologies, Curriculum and InstructionFlorida International UniversityMiami
This entry was posted inUncategorized. Bookmark thepermalink.