pGlobal Classroom
span class="hit"MOOC/span
Massive open online courses--dubbed MOOCs--have lured venture investors and universities, who have put millions of dollars into companies that partner with schools or instructors to offer free courses.
"," WSJ.com, Jan. 2
Other "massive" acronyms include MMO (sometimes MMOG), a "massively multiplayer online game," MPPA, "massively parallel processor array," a type of circuit with many CPUs, and MPSS, "massive parallel signature sequencing," a technique used in genetic analysis.
Far From the Tree
droppage
Last month, the U.S. Department of Agriculture cut its forecast for this season's citrus production in Florida by 5%, to 146 million boxes from 154 million. Among the reasons it cited was an increased rate of droppage--a term referring to fallen fruit--now projected to be the highest since 1970.
"," U.S. News, Jan. 2
"Droppage" is also used to refer to fallen fruit other than citrus, including stone fruit, grapes, cranberries and even tree nuts such as almonds.
Big Business
jukochodai
Mr. Abe, who served a difficult year as prime minister five years ago, is considered a staunch advocate for old-school manufacturers, known as "jukochodai" from the Japanese words for "heavy, thick, long and big."
"," International News, Jan. 2
The opposite of the jukochodai heavy industries are the "keihakutansho" high-tech industries. Keihakutansho means "light, thin, short and small," and is also used to refer to the work done by retirees.
Cruise Ships
slow steaming
Slowing down ships, a technique known as slow steaming, doesn't only offer environmental benefits. It also allows operators to offset the additional capacity created by their bigger ships, because vessels chartered on a given route make fewer rotations.
"," WSJ.com, Dec. 30
Superslow steaming, at 12 knots, can save up to $5,000 an hour in fuel costs. An engine that has been reconfigured to run at slower speeds (in order to avoid problems like increased fouling and higher exhaust) is said to be "derated."
Ms. McKean, a lexicographer, founded Wordnik, an online dictionary focusing on how words are used today./p