To the Editor:
A question comes quickly to mind while reading “In Colleges’ Rush to Try MOOC’s, Faculty Are Not Always in the Conversation” (The Chronicle,September 26): What’s the rush?
Massive open online courses appear to be a way for colleges to broaden their appeal and stand out among other institutions. But I find it strange that institutions with established histories such as Duke University and the California Institute of Technology would find it necessary to jump on MOOC’s. Even more troubling is the quote from Nicholas C. Burbules, a professor of educational-policy studies at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, who admits that his institution is “seeing where it ends up.” During this time of constrained resources, why would a college expend such resources and effort to do something that lacks a clear direction?
While colleges have been criticized of being too slow to adapt to changes in technology, jumping too quickly on the MOOC movement is shortsighted. If colleges see MOOC’s as a way to share information and provide a public good, then they are competing against a much larger and uncontrollable beast—the Internet itself.
The Internet already provides an open space for people to collaborate and share information, through social media, blogs, and collaborative spaces like Wikis. While questions remain as to the quality and reliability of such resources, the fact remains that people are increasingly relying on the Internet to get their information. While paying for a MOOC offered by a reputable institution would pass the credibility check, the quality of the learning itself remains questionable.
Colleges play a role in ensuring that information is accurate and grounded in empirical research. The current model of teaching in college, which emphasizes a balance of both practice and research, allows students to think critically while being held to a standard of quality. The MOOC model does not ensure that such quality checks remain in place for student learning.
Rather than investing in MOOC’s and crowd-learning, colleges should devote their efforts in developing technological tools that can support faculty and existing students. Systems like MOOC’s would facilitate a rush to quantity rather than quality, while offering few practical solutions to the broader issues facing colleges.
Viet T. BuiLos Angeles
This entry was posted inUncategorized. Bookmark thepermalink.