As an avid gamer, I’m always disappointed when a particularly hot new title launches mid-semester. So I was thrilled by the launch ofDiablo IIIlast week just on the heels of graduation, perfectly timed as a reward for finishing grading. This new role-playing game is my pick for adigital distractionthis weekend, although its shaky launch includes some warnings for the future not only of gaming but of any online “service.”
First the good stuff: Diablo III is a classic dungeon crawl, with demons to fight and treasure to gain through relatively easy to pick up gameplay: click to move, and click or use different hotkeys to launch weapons or spells at the bad guys. The story of the Diablo series follows a realm torn by continue warfare between heaven and hell. This sequel has been awaited for over ten years, and the mechanics are polished, with lots of flexibility in equipping your character with skills and gears to fight bad guys.

Another nice part of Diablo III is its approach to multiplayer. In Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOs), rather like in Massively Open Online Courses (MOOCs), you share the world with thousands of people. Diablo III is more intimate in a classic gaming style, evoking LAN parties past, which means a game night with up to four family and friends can proceed uninterrupted. The adventurous can still open their games to anyone who wants to join in. This is a great break from the random encounter problem in massive multiplayer, where a few players dedicated to trolling can ruin part of the game for everyone else. There’s also some components that are individual, like loot—gear and money for improving your character—that doesn’t have to be shared with your compatriots. In previous Diablo games, multiplayer loot was dropped on the ground for everyone to fight over—not the best idea for collegial family play.
However, if you’re looking for a solo game for the weekends, Diablo III might not be the right choice. Theultra-restrictive digital rights management forces players to be online all the time, even when in single-player mode. Launch day server problems caused by the requirement drew attention to the problem, a model that is foreboding for the future of any digital service. The game is designed to be unplayable, unfinished even, without an internet connection; when the servers go down, there’sno more game. Just as with unexpectedly vanishing web services, the game can be pulled out from under the player’s feet.
The Bottom Line:If you’re willing to overlook the draconian DRM and avoid the “real-money” auction house, Diablo III can offer hours of engaging demon-slaying with companions. But the server-based model is bad for digital preservationists, travelers without internet connections, nostalgia gamers…and ultimately, perhaps everyone.
How about you? Were you one of the many players at Diablo III’s launch, or do you have another game on dock for your summer distraction?Let us know in the comments!
This entry was posted inReviews,Softwareand taggedDigital Distractions,games,gaming,video games. Bookmark thepermalink.Anastasia Salter