Last year, I’d asked for some examples of creative syllabuses from ProfHacker readers. We got in somereally outstanding ones, although I probably ran that post too late to be very helpful.
This year, I’d like to remedy that by asking again for syllabuses that you think are particularly well-designed. Feel free to send themto me as an attachment or as a link, and I’ll post some next week. Also, there will be a ProfHacker post or three about syllabuses over the next couple of weeks, so if you have questions about something in your syllabus, ask below in comments.
On to this week’s links . . .
Forget MOOCs (viz.). David Wiley argues that“The No Textbook Degree”will drive a meaningful shift toward genuinely open education, and it’s more possible than you’d think:There is currently a sufficient amount of high quality OER in the general education, business, and computer science areas that a community college could assemble a fully OER-based Associates Degree in either Business or CS from these materials if it had the institutional will and leadership to do so.Interested in large datasets of published text since 1700 or so? (viz.) Ted Underwood explains the process for“Getting everything you want from Hathitrust”:For one thing, they divide documents into individual page files. At first this may seem like a pain (you want a file, right, not a folder of files?) But in fact it’s a significant advantage to have that hard-coded representation of page breaks.Evan Cordulack (viz.) reflects on“Student Thoughts About Podcasting Assignments”:To help me get a handle on the technology we were using in each class, I had asked students to fill out a separate technology evaluation in addition to their standard course evaluations (the questions I asked are listed at the end of this post).  The questions covered blogging, podcasting, and a general question about the use of technology in the course.Johanna Teske explains“organizing discussions of non-academic career paths”(viz.) in the sciences:I think a forum like this is best organized by current graduate students or postdocs, because they will have a better idea of the character of other students and know what type of careers would be most interesting for them to learn about. It also makes the whole process more authentic and less formal; it might be awkward if a faculty member organized it, since they obviously chose a traditional career path! I should point out, though, that there was no awkwardness with our graduate program director paying for pizza and soda.If you’re backing up your tweets (viz.) locally, eventually you’ll probably want to find one, right? Dr. Drangrounds up some simple command line tools for doing so.In this week’s video, Neal Stephenson discusses“getting big stuff done”:

(Looking forward to teachingSnow Crashthis fall!)
Have a great weekend!
Photo“Untitled”by Flickr userjared/Creative Commons licensed BY-2.0
This entry was posted inUncategorized. Bookmark thepermalink.Jason B. Jones