As many hail massive open online courses as the future of higher education, one entrepreneur's plan to exploit the untapped potential of traditional distance learning faces daunting odds, if history is any indicator.
Kim Griffo is the founder of UIU Link, which she says will function as a clearinghouse for unfilled seats in traditional online courses. Colleges, academic departments, and even individual faculty members would pay monthly subscription fees to UIU Link in exchange for tuition dollars from students who are on waiting lists for equivalent courses at overcrowded brick-and-mortar institutions.
It is an idea that grew out of a personal experience: Ms. Griffo, who spends her days as executive director of the International Town andamp; Gown Association, received a frantic text three years ago from her college-student daughter in Kentucky saying that a course she desperately needed that semester was full.
Frustrated, Ms. Griffo visited an admissions office at Clemson University, where the association is based, and said: "I know you've got an empty seat in that course online. Can I have the darned thing and ship it back to Murray State?"
The answer was no.
It would have been no problem had both institutions belonged to the same online-education collaborative, like WICHE ICE—the Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education's Internet Course Exchange—which enables students to take online courses from fellow member colleges.
And plenty of institutions have agreements that ease student transfers and course reciprocity among institutions in the same state or region. But Murray State University has no such agreement with Clemson.
With the help of an advisory board, Ms. Griffo began developing UIU Link, a software platform that uses the Tegrity lecture-capture system to integrate with the Blackboard course-management system. The system is in beta testing and is to be unveiled this week in a "soft launch."
Students will be able to check whether the courses they need are available from participating institutions or faculty members.
"At that point our system helps them with tracking and confirmation to make sure that before they take a class and pay for it, there are no surprises, that it transfers," Ms. Griffo says.
Ultimately, the student's adviser will have to make that call.
'A Real Challenge'Ms. Griffo has high hopes for UIU Link, which she says is backed by $500,000 from "an angel-type investor." She believes that faculty members will warm to the platform because it is easy to use, and it promises the possibility of a payoff.
"Traditional higher ed needs to come into this space but still keep everything intact, and keep the academic rigor that goes with it," she says. "People I've spoken to said over and over, it's like the Wild West right now in online education."
Stacey Simmons might agree with that. Two years ago, as associate director for economic development at Louisiana State University's Center for Computation andamp; Technology, she founded a company similar to UIU Link called Omnicademy. Its platform was designed to allow institutions to share and syndicate their courses.
"We are still active in terms of our business, but we've not really had a lot of luck," says Ms. Simmons, who left LSU in hopes of marketing her product.
She says that while college administrators like the notion of saving money by not duplicating courses and faculty members, they have been unwilling to give faculty members a large enough share of the tuition money generated by the presence of additional students in their courses. "By the time the royalty gets to the faculty member, it's about 15 percent," she says, and that's not worth their while.
While the tuition goes to the providing institution, the per-student fees paid to public colleges remain with the student's home institution. "I had a university president tell me flat out, 'Why would I subsidize my competition when they're going to get the state per-capita dollars?'" Ms. Simmons says.
WICHE ICE is gradually expanding, but it and other nonprofit efforts that are organized geographically, or to cover specific professions, have struggled to get adequate financing, says Russell Poulin, deputy director for research and analysis for the WICHE Cooperative for Educational Technologies. "Something that transcended these niches might be helpful," he says.
Robert Shireman, a former U.S. Education Department official who is now director of the higher-education policy organization California Competes, isn't buying it. The problem with UIU Link and similar efforts, he says, is that wait-listed students who take courses online need reassurance that the credits will be accepted not only at their home institutions but at any institutions they might transfer to, as well as within their individual majors.
"I would worry that UIU Link is still too simplistic to offer students what they need," he says.
Building PartnershipsCalifornia already has a Web site at Assist.org that helps students sort out which courses are acceptable substitutes within specific majors at specific public colleges. Yet tens of thousands of students in the state still complain about not gaining admittance to certain classes that are required for graduation. To confront that issue, State Sen. Darrell Steinberg, a Democrat, has proposedlegislation thatwould compel state institutions to accept credits earned in massive open online courses, or MOOCs.
Ms. Griffo says UIU Link will avoid working with for-profit institutions and will make it possible for cash-strapped colleges to provide small-enrollment courses that are the antithesis of MOOCs.
Shari McCurdy Smith is a former director of the New Century Learning Consortium, which at the time helped create online and blended learning programs at small and midsize colleges and universities. She says that building online partnerships was an enormous but worthy challenge. "It's the holy grail of academic institutions," she says.
She recalls a time, eight years ago, when American higher education briefly abandoned its barriers to such partnerships. Hurricane Katrina had devastated the Gulf Coast, displacing thousands of students. The Southern Regional Education Board, working with the Sloan Consortium, helped the students stay on track toward their degrees by connecting them with online courses from 153 colleges that waived their tuition.
"Problems dissolve very quickly, and silos go away when good can be done," she says. "It's about access. And increasing access to education is always a good thing."
Don Troop