pThe latest must-have accouterment for your luxury Upper Northwest home: A hockey rink. This being D.C., the homeowner's move to install a 30-by-64-foot icy expanse has raised hackles on his Wesley Heights block, the Post's Annie Gowen reports. The house used to belong to Richard Nixon; now it belongs to Brooke Coburn, a Carlyle Group managing director, who is installing the rink after embarking on a major renovation of the home. "Can people do this?" asks his next-door neighbor. People indeed can do that, and after a permitting snafu, the rink is now installed and legal.
In other news:
Mother killed, baby wounded in Metrobus shooting in Fairlawn (Post, WJLA-TV, WTOP)
Phil Mendelson begins to navigate D.C. Council's racial minefield (Post)
D.C. jail inmate who hanged himself last month had a history of mental illness (Post)
Tonight, Democratic insiders will pick an at-large D.C. Council member. Is it time to ditch the party appointment process? (Examiner)
Yes! Organic's east-of-the-river location lives, under a new name (Capital Business)
Prosecutors need to detail what happened to the unreported money in Kwame Brown's 2008 campaign (Post editorial)
Airports Authority hiring rife with nepotism; "no clear-cut guidelines," says board member (Post)
Darrell Issa says referendum would just delay budget autonomy (D.C. Wire)
Colby King: "Check out Kwame Brown two years from now. Don't expect him to be down and out." (Post column)
Is the Post being fair to Mayor Vincent Gray? (Post ombudsman)
Dan Tangherlini makes the most of his time atop GSA (Capital Business)
With the arts, Patrick Pope invigorates Anacostia's Savoy Elementary (Post)
Why was Christophe Tulou fired for asking reasonable questions? (Post editorial)
Hoover Building's potential demise would mean end of a cultural icon (AP)
Business tax is throwing off more than enough cash to pay off ballpark bonds (WaTimes)
How many managers does it take to put bathroom stalls in a D.C. high school? (Loose Lips)
Unsurprising data point of the week: Most new D.C. jobs go to suburban dwellers (Examiner)
Gray administration makes common-sensical determination that residential parking permits are too cheap (D.C. Wire, DCist)
Height Act study is "a win-win proposition for all stakeholders" (Post column)
Tony Williams: D.C. should fund infrastructure upgrades Rahm Emanuel style (Capital Business)
Marion Barry accuses D.C. Chamber CEO Barbara Lang of being an Aunt Tom (WBJ)
And also takes shots at his colleagues (Examiner)
DDOT study: Most new cyclists are men (WTOP)
Deborah Simmons believes "New Urbanism" is to blame for gentrification ills (WaTimes)
The socialists mobilize against school closings (World Socialist)
Metro says cops, even plainclothes ones, still ride free (Post)
D.C. moves to adopt eco-friendly building codes (WBJ, Housing Complex)
After layoffs, LivingSocial shuffles its office portfolio (WBJ)
D.C. gov's vacant space could incubate businesses (WBJ)
Car drives into Adams Morgan McDonald's (Dr. Gridlock)
For key public spaces, 14 more police surveillance cameras (Examiner)
Harry Jaffe won't say what role he played in Michelle Rhee's new book (City Desk)
Planners put new restrictions on accessory dwellings in latest zoning proposal (GGW)
The 1800 block(s) of Columbia Road is the best place ever (OPinions)
Man, 73, accused of shooting 63-year-old girlfriend to death (Crime Scene)
Georgetown U. joins thespan class="hit"MOOC/spanmovement (Post)
But it did not win a national soccer championship (Post)
Marshall Heights wins, Beacon House falls short in Pop Warner finals (DCist)
Check out Don Peebles' soon-to-be-former Massachusetts Avenue Heights home (WSJ)
Jacques Morgan, ponytailed proprietor of Adams Morgan's Idle Time Books, has died at 62 (Post)/p