pKELLOGG
Some Boxes of Special K
Red Berries Recalled
Kellogg Co. is voluntarily recalling three sizes of its Special K Red Berries cereal packages due to the possible presence of glass fragments.
There have been no reports of injuries associated with the recalled product, Kellogg said on its website. The packages in question were sold at various retailers across the U.S.
Kellogg is trying to get its business back after having to pour money into improving its supply chain following two major product recalls in recent years. Late last year, Kellogg recalled 2.8 million boxes of Mini-Wheats cereal due to the possible presence of metal mesh fragments.
Two weeks ago, the company -- known for such brands as Pop-Tarts, Rice Krispies and Nutri-Grain -- reported its fourth-quarter sales rose 18.2%, helped by its recent acquisitions of Pringles, growth in Latin America and improving results in North America.
-- Nathalie Tadena
---
COURSERA
Online-Education Provider
Signs on 29 More Schools
Online-education provider Coursera announced Thursday that 29 more schools have signed on to offer massive, open, online courses, dubbed MOOCs. The new partners include Northwestern University, IE Business School in Spain and National Taiwan University, and nearly double the stable of schools providing instruction on Coursera's platform, up to a total of 62 schools.
Mountain View, Calif.-based Coursera, which was launched less than a year ago with backing from Silicon Valley investors, has so far attracted nearly 2.8 million unique registered users.
Meanwhile edX, a nonprofitspan class="hit"MOOC/spanfounded by Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is adding six schools to its partner roster. New partners include McGill University, Rice University and the Australian National University. EdX has more than 700,000 users signed up for courses from elite U.S. schools; this is the first time it has signed on international partners.
-- Melissa Korn
---
TOLL BROTHERS
Housing Market Recovery
Benefits Home Builder
Toll Brothers Inc. swung to a quarterly profit as the luxury home builder saw increased closings and orders, but fewer closings than expected and lower average selling prices weighed on revenue.
Toll Brothers, which caters largely to affluent move-up buyers in the Northeast and mid-Atlantic, is considered one of the top performers in the home-building sector, which has shown signs of emerging from a historic downturn.
For the quarter ended Jan. 31, Toll Brothers reported a profit of $4.4 million, or three cents a share, versus a loss of $2.8 million, or two cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue rose 32% to $424.6 million.
Toll Brothers delivered 746 units, a 32% increase from a year earlier.
-- Saabira Chaudhuri
---
DISH NETWORK
Profit Drop Underscores
Operator's Aim to Diversify
Dish Network Corp. reported a 33% drop in fourth-quarter net income, as subscriber growth slowed and programming expenses rose, highlighting why the satellite-TV operator is looking to diversify into wireless broadband.
On a call to discuss the earnings, Dish Network Chairman Charlie Ergen made his case for why Sprint Nextel Corp. should accept Dish's offer for its half-owned wireless affiliate Clearwire Corp. He argued that if Sprint accepted Dish's offer for Clearwire, it would provide capital to both Clearwire and Sprint, and Sprint would be Dish's "most likely partner" in a wireless network. But he said if Dish doesn't succeed with the bid, "then Sprint's probably not a likely partner."
Dish has confirmed that it made an offer to buy Clearwire for $3.30 a share late last year, along with offering to pay $2.2 billion for a chunk of Clearwire's spectrum. The takeover offer is pitched as an 11% premium to the offer that Sprint made late last year. Sprint owns half of Clearwire but doesn't exercise control of the company. Mr. Ergen said because Sprint doesn't control the board, Dish has "an actionable item" in front of Clearwire.
A Sprint spokesman said the "Dish offer is highly conditional" and that "we have an agreement with Clearwire, and we are moving forward with government and shareholder approval."
Dish reported a profit of $209.1 million, or 46 cents a share, for the fourth quarter, down from $313 million, or 70 cents a share a year earlier. Revenue declined 1.2% to $3.59 billion.
-- Shalini Ramachandran
Subscribe to WSJ:/p