pA California lawmaker is scheduled to unveil a bill Wednesday that would make his state the first in the nation to offer college students a statewide system of faculty-approved, online college courses for credit.
The bill, to be filed by California Senate President Darrell Steinberg, comes as so-called massive open online courses have begun to revolutionize education, reaching millions of students who often pay nothing. At the same time, state aid for higher education is being slashed across the U.S., raising tuition and creating long lines for classes. The problem is particularly acute in California, where colleges have been underfunded for years.
"The goal is to help out students who are having a tough time getting classes," said Mark Hedlund, a spokesman for Mr. Steinberg.
Several schools such as San Jose State University and Georgia State University, have accepted MOOCs for credit. Last month, Coursera--the largestspan class="hit"MOOC/spanprovider--won recommendations for credit by the American Council on Education for five of its courses. The bill in California is significant because if it passes it would clear the widest pathway yet for students to get academic credit for MOOCs.
Michelle Pilati, president of the Academic Senate for California Community Colleges, said if a student took aspan class="hit"MOOC/spanthey would still have to pass a test to get credit for the course. But the implications could be significant.
"We have access issues and this will help address that," she said.
Andrew Ng, the co-founder of Coursera, called the proposal significant "because so many students are having trouble getting into classes and this opens up another option to them."
However, he added that the student-professor relationship shouldn't be allowed to get lost in the rush online.
"There is something very sacred about that relationship," Mr. Ng said. "I think here in California we need more professors, more universities and more capacity."
Write to Douglas Belkin at  and Jim Carlton at
Credit: By Douglas Belkin                 And Jim Carlton/p