Joyce Hesselberth for The Chronicle
Over the past six months, I, like many others in academe, have had a crash course in the digital revolution. It has been quite a journey.
Flash back to March 2012, when I attend a meeting for chief academic officers of Christian colleges. Conversations circle back to a single topic: the impending revolution in higher education brought on by the Internet. I learn a new acronym—MOOC, meaning a massive open online course, which can enroll thousands of students around the world. The next month, Stanford University's president, John Hennessy, declares inThe New Yorker,"There's a tsunami coming."
This is all news to me, since apparently I've been too busy managing budgets and calculating teaching loads to notice an approaching tidal wave. If my institution, Cornerstone University, in Grand Rapids, Mich., is about to be engulfed by a digital tsunami, then as provost I should probably give my people a heads-up. So after trying and failing to open a Twitter account (I have a complicated relationship with passwords), I spend the next few months boning up on the latest books.
I learn how "disruptive innovation," as termed by Clayton Christensen, threatens traditional organizations, and how technology is scrambling the world of higher education just as it did the music industry a decade ago. It all adds up to what has become a familiar story: The Internet is disrupting traditional higher education by enabling for-profit and other online programs to provide a less expensive but still solid product. MOOC's will empower students to unbundle their educations by cobbling together their learning from a variety of sources. Prognosticators envision a future in which students earn competency "badges" in specialized areas of study, and the Internet replaces traditional accreditors in deciding which credentials are legitimate.
Of the books I read, one stands out for its eager embrace of the coming changes: Cathy N. Davidson'sNow You See It: How the Brain Science of Attention Will Transform the Way We Live, Work, and Learn(Viking Press, 2011). For Davidson, a Duke University professor of English and interdisciplinary studies, the coming tsunami means one thing: excellent surfing. Rigid classrooms, one-way lectures, and multiple-choice exams are making way for new forms of open-ended, collaborative learning, which are better adapted to today's easily distracted, Internet-trained brains. Davidson gave her Duke students iPods, so they could record lectures and listen to them while jogging or riding the bus. Students decided which topics the class should study and how to grade one another's work.
Those visions both intrigue and trouble me. I'm always looking for ways to make my teaching more interactive and engaging, and if iPods can help, I'm all for them. But I'm not sure where my course on, say, the Reformation would end up if I just let the semester take us wherever students wanted to go. I'm afraid that we would start at the Council of Constance and end up at the 1919 World Series.
After a month of reading, I'm ambivalent. I see the potential to improve education with technology, but I worry about losing something in the process. Is my resistance simply the knee-jerk skepticism of a religious historian nurtured in traditional academe, or is the true value of higher education in danger of being lost in our rush to digitize the experience? How does one distinguish between legitimate concern and mere nostalgia?
In June I take another step into the future: My university, which provides laptops for students and professors, is switching from PC's to MacBooks. Our leadership team is invited to spend a day at Digital Mecca—Apple's headquarters, in Cupertino, Calif.—to hear presentations describing Apple's plans to transform higher education.
Apple's leaders like to say that they stand at the intersection of technology and the liberal arts. That's music to my ears and goes a long way to allay my fears about a techie takeover of liberal-arts education. To help make the point, Apple treats us to presentations on its technology by a former Christian-college philosophy major and a medievalist professor at another Christian college.
By the end of the day, I'm warming to the prospect that technology can help us create a learning environment that promotes more creative, engaged learning. If my university can employ technology to educate our students better while making life easier for professors, then that's the best of all possible worlds. Why would I not want to create my own iBook for a course and send it to students on their iPads? Why should I do all the work of preparing an overview of the French Revolution when I can direct students to a Khan Academy lecture on the topic, then discuss it with them in class?
I'm ready to get on board the technology train—but not without some lingering reservations.
First, I can't shake Marshall McLuhan's famous proclamation that "the medium is the message." Technology is not a neutral ether through which ideas flow from teacher to student. Rather, the technology itself shapes those ideas in profound ways. As an educator, therefore, I wonder what messages our wonderful devices convey to our students in addition to words, music, and videos.
Davidson gives us a clue. In discussing her use of collaborative grading by students, she remarks, "Welcome to the Internet, where everyone's a critic and anyone can express a view about the new iPhone, restaurant, or quarterback. That democratizing of who can pass judgment is digital thinking." How does such digital thinking fit my institution if an essential purpose of a Christian college is not just the acquisition of knowledge but the nurturing of wisdom? How can a professor be a mentor and a "sage" in an environment in which everyone can render judgments equally? And how is such wisdom advanced by the vastly increased access to information via Google and Wikipedia, when such innovations are "incapable of making distinctions of value," as Andrew Delbanco observes in his bookCollege: What It Was, Is, and Should Be(Princeton University Press, 2012).
Moreover, I suspect that if education is to remain a truly human endeavor in which students gain not just knowledge but also wisdom, it will always be a bit messy and unpredictable. And here's my lingering reservation about Apple: Steve Jobs deplored messiness. The beauty of Apple products—the "secret sauce," as one of our presenters called it—is that unlike the open system of Microsoft, an Apple device is a closed system, which seamlessly integrates software and hardware. That's what makes it feel so pleasingly simple to a technophobe but also what makes it resistant to tinkering, playing, and being messed with. Ironically, the device that empowers the user to explore the world is itself impervious to exploration.
A day after my Apple visit, I run across aChronicleessay cleverly titled "A Technological Cloud Hangs Over Higher Education," by Keith A. Williams. The author, a physicist, observes that the physical objects of many science classrooms—globes, periodic tables, beakers, and tubes—have been rendered obsolete by computer technology and laboratory-simulation software existing in "the cloud." Chemistry experiments performed on a computer can't go wrong and blow up the classroom. But I wonder what is lost in the process. Is a certain lack of control—perhaps even danger—essential to the learning process? After all, Christian education is about developing human beings, and human nature, like ammonium nitrate, can be dangerously volatile under certain conditions.
My most memorable classroom experiences as a student have occurred when, in the middle of a lecture or a tedious discussion, an awkward question was raised, a student got upset, or something didn't go as planned. At such times the professor had to depart from the script, allow his students to see him as a real person, and draw on a reservoir of wisdom and knowledge that we students lacked but deeply desired.
Amid all of our revolutionizing of higher education, I hope that such experiences are more common, and not less so, when the tsunami recedes.
Rick Ostrander is provost at Cornerstone University.
Rick Ostrander