Sit down at your computer for the opening lecture in Gad Allon's "Operations Management" course, and the first thing you notice is that the professor is looking off at an angle. You want to snap him back around so that he makes eye contact.
Gautam Kaul's "Introduction to Finance" course goes for a different feel. He looks right at you and speaks in a conversational, almost conspiratorial voice. It's as if he's tutoring you one-on-one, letting you in on life-changing secrets like the time value of money.
Both professors are teaching MOOC's—massive open online courses—the latest development in online education. Over the past decade, millions of students have taken free online versions of existing courses at well-known universities like the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, but such courses often offered little more than reading lists and lecture notes. MOOC's, too, are typically free, but they are far more interactive, interspersing quizzes and other assignments among short videos. Given the courses' huge size—Mr. Kaul's has 130,000 students—exchanges between the professor and students are minimal. But many MOOC's feature automated grading and the ability to earn a certificate for mastering the material.
More than 1.3 million students have already signed up for MOOC's through Coursera, a for-profit company founded by two Stanford University computer scientists. A handful of other providers, such as Udacity and Udemy, which are also for-profit, and edX, a nonprofit effort run jointly by MIT, Harvard University, and the University of California at Berkeley, are rapidly adding courses.
With few best practices, anything goes—which explains the vastly different approaches used by different professors.
Mr. Allon, an associate professor at Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management, chose to look off at an angle for most of his lectures to give the impression of looking out at a big audience—and to avoid "intimidating" students staring at him on a computer monitor. Mr. Kaul, a professor at the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business, went for the one-on-one approach so he could get over his anxiety about "teaching nobody and yet everybody."
With a $0 price tag and open admission to anyone in the world with a high-speed Internet connection, MOOC's inevitably report poor completion rates. More than 94,000 students registered this spring for "Introduction to Computer Science," one of the first courses offered by Udacity, but just over 10 percent earned certificates for completing the class. Most didn't get through the first lecture.
"If you were in a classroom and 90 percent of the students were walking out in the first few minutes," concedes David Evans, a University of Virginia computer scientist who taught the course, "that would be pretty depressing."
On the other hand, how many professors can boast of shepherding nearly 10,000 students through a challenging course in just one semester?
Following are reports on how the new frontier is playing out at four of the largest free MOOC's.
'Introduction to Finance,' Coursera
Gautam Kaul, professor of finance, University of Michigan's Ross School of Business
Amanda L. Smith, Avery Photo
Joe Alfonso, a financial adviser from Oregon, is taking the online finance course as a "refresher."
Joe Alfonso, a financial planner in a suburb of Portland, Ore., stumbled upon Mr. Kaul's class after his wife read a newspaper article about Coursera. Mr. Alfonso wanted a "refresher" with a more academic focus than in previous courses he had taken to earn a financial-planning credential. He especially likes the way the professor weaves his own philosophy into the lectures.
Mr. Kaul decided early on not to interact with students—he feared doing so would consume all his time. Yet Mr. Alfonso says he almost feels closer to Mr. Kaul than he did to his own professors at Cornell University, where he earned a philosophy degree in 1981 (and spent much of time interacting with teaching assistants).
"In a weird way, you have this connection with him," Mr. Alfonso says. "You almost feel like he's speaking directly to you."
Mr. Kaul began designing the course as soon as the spring semester ended, forgoing his usual summer focus on administrative tasks and research. He receives no compensation from Coursera. Michigan is paying him for the work, but only because he's among a chosen group at the university experimenting with the new format.
His lecture segments run longer than average for the genre—as long as 20 minutes. "You don't want to break up something that can't be broken up," he insists.
Creating tests for the end of each segment that are challenging but not too hard has been "mind-bogglingly complex," he says. "The learning curve is extremely steep."
Mr. Alfonso says he fits the coursework in between meetings with clients. While he needs continuing-education credits to maintain his professional certification, he's not taking the course for that reason.
"I'm doing it because it's great stuff," Mr. Alfonso says. "I would have dropped it if it wasn't."
***
'Circuits and Electronics,' MITx
Anant Agarwal, president of edX and a former directorof MIT's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
Lance Murphey for The Chronicle
Frank Basile, an aircraft technician, took an MITx course on circuits and electronics  to increase his knowledge.
Frank Basile works the night shift at FedEx, helping to maintain the cargo planes at the company's hub, in Memphis. Last spring, on nights when the flights were going smoothly, he and a co-worker plowed through segments of "Circuits and Electronics."
Mr. Basile had experimented with open courseware at MIT but had never completed any courses. "It just didn't have a structured feel," he says. Mr. Agarwal's course was different—with lab experiments, deadlines for homework, and a midterm and final. "It was just like taking a real class," Mr. Basile says.
He learned about circuits in the military. At work he uses circuits that control functions like aviation warning systems. But the MITx course (now part of edX) required knowledge of advanced math, including differential equations. So Mr. Basile, who doesn't have a college degree, found himself turning to Khan Academy, which offers more than 3,000 instructional videos on YouTube. Mr. Agarwal had warned in his course description that his class wouldn't be "MIT-lite."
"I had to put everything I had into it in order to pass," says Mr. Basile, who earned a certificate for doing so. "I certainly got the sense that they didn't hold anything back."
Despite the difficult subject matter, Mr. Agarwal set out to make the course fun. He talks about the "gamification" of learning. A generation reared on video games needs interactive stimulation to stay engaged, he believes.
The professor built an online "circuits sandbox" that has the feel of manipulating circuitry on a laboratory table. Students make adjustments in order to get it to play music.
The discussion forums also had a game-related component—students earned "karma points" for providing answers that others liked. The biggest point earners eventually earned "instructor privileges," which allowed them to do things like end discussion threads.
"We're babes in the woods with these massive online courses," Mr. Agarwal says. "We're learning so much every day."
Mr. Basile liked the innovations, but he also sought a hands-on experience. He ordered resistors and capacitors so he could build the kind of circuits discussed in the course.
"Once you do it in real life," he says, "you get a better sense of how circuits really work."
***
'Operations Management,' Udemy
Gad Allon, associate professor of managerial economics and decision sciences, Northwestern University's Kellogg School of Management
Patrick Murphy-Racey for The Chronicle
Krissa Swain, of Knoxville, Tenn., is taking "Operations Management" online to help develop her management skills.
Krissa Swain is just a dissertation away from earning a Ph.D. in history at Cornell. But when her employer, the online tutoring company Smarthinking, promoted her to a management position a year ago, she knew it was time to go back to school.
She recently enrolled in "Operations Management," which focuses on managing a business to produce goods and services. "I work with a lot of operations people," she says. "In order to be able to speak their language, I thought it would be helpful for me to take the course."
Udemy approached Mr. Allon about teaching the course, and Northwestern, which hasn't aligned with any MOOC providers, encouraged him to try it.
The version of the course that he teaches to Kellogg students relies heavily on case studies and classroom discussion—both of which presented problems as he designed the MOOC. A casebook for an M.B.A. course typically costs $40 to $50, he says, an amount that might discourage some people from even considering the class. He decided to proceed in Coursera without one. And while online discussion forums can be fine for resolving problems, they're not always great at stimulating the freewheeling discussion that Mr. Allon encourages in his live class.
The MOOC has more than 4,400 students, but the discussion board has been a disappointment, he concedes. Most threads consist of little more than a posted question that he has answered.
"This is a learning experience for me as much as for my students," Mr. Allon says.
He is proud of the production quality of the video lectures, even if it took him a while to find his rhythm. "It's very difficult to teach when you don't have a crowd in front of you," he says. He scaled back the video segments to five minutes apiece after finding that longer segments led students to drift away.
Ms. Swain, who works from her home office in Knoxville, Tenn., spends the first 45 minutes of each workday on the class. "My company considers it part of my professional development," she says. "They encourage it."
***
'Introduction to Computer Science,' Udacity
David Evans, associate professor of computer science, University of Virginia
Nathan G for The Chronicle
Rajeev Bajpai, an airline pilot based in Mumbai, took an online computer-science course to gain programming skills.
Rajeev Bajpai, an airline pilot based in Mumbai, was poking around on Stanford's Web site last winter when he spied a link to the computer-science class taught by Mr. Evans.
Mr. Bajpai, who also has a management role at his airline, was interested in computers and thought some programming expertise would help him at work.
"There are many small jobs that lend themselves to automation and analysis," he says. "I have engineering graduates reporting to me. When they write the code, I'll know how to walk the talk."
Mr. Evans knew he would need to find a way to hook the MOOC students early and keep them coming back. So he structured the course around a fun activity—building a search engine. The seven-week course included about 90 minutes of lectures each week, but Mr. Evans divided his time on camera into segments as short as two minutes. He also tried to keep students engaged with plenty of quizzes and programming exercises.
The course uses Python, a programming language in applications designed by Google and NASA, among others. Mr. Evans thinks the course can be offered again and again, with tweaks, for several years. When the first run ended, last spring, he changed some homework problems that had confused students and added a unit that would help them transition into higher-level courses. Students can now take a version of the course that allows them to spend as long as they like working through the material.
"One of the nice things about the online format is that you can improve parts of the class and reuse the rest," Mr. Evans says. "The core ideas in computing don't change."
Mr. Bajpai had to drop out of the winter version of the course because of family and work obligations. "I unenrolled, thinking that was the etiquette," he says. But he learned recently that he could pick up where he left off, and this time he expects to complete the course.
"I'm just happy to be here," he says. "It was an impossible dream only a handful of years ago."
Ben Gose