[December’s Teaching Carnival was compiled by Mikhail Gershovich, Director of the Bernard L. Schwartz Communication   Institute andamp; Writing Across the Curriculum coordinator at Baruch   College, City University of New York.  You can reach him viaemailor onTwitter.  ProfHacker has become the permanent home of the Teaching Carnival, so  each month you can return for a snapshot of the most recent thoughts on  teaching in college and university classrooms. You can find previous  carnivals on Teaching Carnival’shome page. –Billie Hara]
Know of a blog post (perhaps your own) that should be included in the next Teaching Carnival…?
Email the next host directly with the address to the permalink of your blog post, and/orTag your post inDelicious(orDiigoor other bookmarking service) withteaching-carnival.♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
Hurry, hurry, hurry. Step right up. See the most amazing, most provocative, most edumacational teaching links on the Interwebz. Don’t miss your chance to be wowed, amazed, professionally developed and procrastinated! Step right this way!
This month at the Teaching Carnival:
Edudemic showcases100 best web 2.0 tools for teachers as chosen by teacherswhile Peter Dewitt offers an in-depth discussion ofwhy educators should join Twitter. Mrs. Ripp suggests14 steps to meaningful student blogging, George Siemens sharesa few simple tools he’s like ed-tech startups to build.and Audrey Watters tells us aboutCode Now, a DC area program dedicated to teaching underserved high school students how to program.
Tom Woodward offers us some things to considerregarding the instructional use of digital content, and Jane Hart argues thatwhile we can manage the use of media that can facilitate informal learning, we can’t manage informal learning itself.
Stephen Lazar, of Education Week, suggestshow to teach high-school history by facilitating critical inquiry. Liz Losh discusses the use ofdigital role-playing games for a critical engagement with racial history.Mike Cosgrove explains how toGame Reality History. The Christian Cynic considersanalysis of song lyrics as a means of encouraging critical thought. Andrew Miller argues forintegrating visual art into curriculaas a form of critical thinking.
Ryan Cordell discusses“speed-dating” peer-review writing workshops, and Dean Shareski proclaimslectures good.At cac.ophony.org,Meechal HoffmanandErica Kaufmanoffer a few thoughts on teaching with technology, and Sarah Ruth Jacobs traces the genealogy of communication across the the curriculum courses (part 1andpart 2.)
At Blogging Pedagogy, we learn how theVoyeur data visualization tool and the automated text analysis it offers might be useful for revisionand consider a rumination onthe form of the blog post.
Mark Sample and  Shannon Matterneach present on the digital humanities in the classroom(videos). Roger Whitson calls on DH teachers and scholars toengage in digital activismto undercut a “cultural obsession with individualism” foster an environment where collaborative digital projects are valued.
You’ve heard of the MOOC, now learn all about it:The 7 things you should know about MOOCs.Alan Levine considersthe “course-iness” of MOOCs.David Kernohandiscusses the mythical #economooc. Michael Feldstein offers some thoughts onscaling MOOCs.
Ok, you get the MOOC butwhat is this rhizomatic learning?Dave Cormier explains. If that wasn’t clear,here’s how he explains it to his 5 year old.
In the spirit of the Occupy Movement, Jose Vilson offersJames Baldwin’s take on the purpose education: “The paradox of education is precisely this – that as one begins to become conscious one begins to examine the society in which he is being educated.”  Along those lines: Cheryl Smith onteaching and protest, Jay Cross onoccupying education, and Cathy Davidson on why this is a“Gettysburg address moment in higher education.”
Clayton R. Wright gives us aseemingly comprehensive list of education technology conferences, January-June 2012.(.doc, courtesy ofStephen Downes)
Audrey Watters speculates onwhether the Kindle Fire will be popular among educatorsand then later discusseswhy she sent hers back to Amazon.
At the Chatty Professor, Ellen Bremen reflects onhow college students manage changing relationshipsand discusseswhat students should know about faculty office hours. Quinn Warnick sharesthe list of articles he asks undergraduates to read before offering advice on grad school. Delaney Kirk suggestswhat students can expect from their profsandwhat profs should expect from their students.
Alice Cassidy sharesa wealth of resources on sustainability education and leadership.
Trouble with your IT Department? Here’show to work successfully with them.
And, finally, Wired UK explains the science ofwhy the sound of fingernails on a blackboard makes us cringe.
♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦
Tonya Howe, Assistant Professor of English at Marymount University will compile the TC for January 2012.  Send your teaching-related links to Tonya at heremailor onTwitter.  Keep in mind, that if you don’t send us your posts, we might miss them.  So send them on!  We want to include you in our next Teaching Carnival.   Lastly, we are looking for more contributors for the Teaching Carnival,  so if you have interest in compiling links for one month later this  year or the beginning of next year, please contactBillie Harafor information.
[Post image provided byGiulia Forsythe.]
This entry was posted inTeachingand taggedteaching carnival. Bookmark thepermalink.Prof. Hacker