Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) offers free IT and business skills for users globallyWALTHAM, Mass.,Nov. 1, 2012/PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- For the many people around the world who are miles away from the expertise and resources they need to start or upgrade a small business, an online training program offers the very latest in practical IT and business skills. The HP LIFE e-Learning program, developed byEDCand HP together with a team of partners, includes free, interactive online courses to help budding entrepreneurs create, establish, and grow successful businesses. The program is being widely disseminated in time for Global Entrepreneurship Week, November 12–16."The HP LIFE e-Learning program is an innovative and interactive program that helps entrepreneurs solve business challenges with technology solutions," said EDC'sRebecca Stoeckle. "Massive Open Online Courses, or MOOCs, such as this one are changing expectations and opportunities for the more than 75 million unemployed youth around the world. With HP LIFE, high-quality training in business skills is now available globally and for free."This program's flexible, modular curriculum includes short units covering four main topics:  finance, marketing, operations, and communication. Using self-paced, interactive modules, practical business advice, and discussion boards, HP LIFE e-Learning courses introduce relevant business and IT skills, such as using a spreadsheet to track expenses or social media to market a business. The program includes dramatic narratives of the real-life challenges faced by nascent entrepreneurs in a variety of settings around the world.Designed for entrepreneurs at any business stage or skill level, the HP LIFE e-Learning program enables learners to receive feedback and advice from members of the HP LIFE community. The course remains dynamic, engaging, and responsive to the emerging concerns of entrepreneurs thanks to new modules that are rolled out every month, peer-to-peer learning, and user-contributed content.Since the HP LIFE program launched in 2007, over 1.2 million entrepreneurs have been reached with training, access to IT, and online activities, which has resulted in over 43,000 new jobs created or maintained and nearly 20,000 new businesses. The program has 340 training centers in 49 countries."HP has a strong history of commitment to education, and we are excited to assist and encourage new entrepreneurs all over the world with our latest cloud-based technology solution," said HP's Jeannette Weisschuh, Director Global Education Strategy, HP Sustainability andamp; Social Innovation. "EDC is a preferred partner in this venture because of their global network and experience using innovative technology to develop powerful learning and teaching programs."The HP LIFE program has been included as a best practice in the Obama administration's Startup America Initiative, which was launched in 2011 to accelerate the growth of fledgling, job-creating companies. To learn more, visitHP LIFE e-Learning.Education Development Center, Inc. (EDC),is a global nonprofit organization that addresses some of the world's most urgent challenges in education, health, and economic development. EDC manages more than 250 projects in 23 countries.SOURCE  Education Development Center Inc.RELATED LINKShttp://www.edc.org