A TEMPORARY PASS Regulators on Thursday announced a clarification that Wall Street need not immediately comply with a new rule banning banks from trading with their own money, sending sighs of relief across the financial industry. The guidance, delivered by the Federal Reserve and other agencies, explained that under the Dodd-Frank Act, banks have two years to fully comply with the Volcker Rule.While the law called for a two-year compliance period until 2014, the fine print left some room for interpretation. Banks were jittery about what would happen come July 21, Day One for the rule, fearing that they would have to scramble to comply before a final rule spelled out the nitty-gritty of their obligations. BEN PROTESSOLIVE BRANCH ON PAY  Barclays says its executives will give up some of their bonuses if the bank fails to meet profitability goals. The bank said Robert E. Diamond Jr., left, its chief executive, and Chris Lucas, its finance director, would receive only half of their 2011 deferred stock bonus if Barclays's return on equity failed to exceed its cost of equity in the next three years.Mr. Diamond's pay has been a point of contention ever since Barclays said it produced "unacceptable" returns in 2011 but awarded its chief $10 million. JULIA WERDIGIERBIG DAY FORBIG DATAWhile the market for technology offerings has recently been dominated by social media companies like LinkedIn and Zynga, the world of data analytics software is starting to shine. Take Splunk, an enterprise software company. Splunk went public at $17 a share and closed at $35.48, valuing it at $3.28 billion. EVELYN M. RUSLIWALL STREET TWEET Sallie L. Krawcheck, below, may not work in finance, but she is still in the fray -- in 140 characters or less. Ms. Krawcheck, who led Bank of America's wealth management unit until September, has been posting from a Twitter account and has more than 2,000 followers."I believe that my experiences can be of use to people," she said.WILLIAM ALDENnytimes.com/dealbookPhotos