Politicians and regulators are bickering again over who should oversee the nation's 28,000 investment advisers, who manage some $50 trillion.A bill introduced in the House of Representatives at the end of April would take that job away from the federal Securities and Exchange Commission and regulators in 48 states--and could hand it to the nongovernmental Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, which already oversees securities brokers and dealers.There is a better way. Investment advisers are being examined infrequently, inconsistently and incompletely--largely because regulators are outnumbered and reliant on outmoded technology. In a business world that routinely runs on "big data," it's time to put computers on the case.In fiscal 2011, the SEC examined just 8% of the 12,600 advisers under its jurisdiction. Roughly 5,000 advisers have never been audited by the SEC.State regulators, who are responsible for inspecting smaller investment advisers, look a bit nimbler. Two-thirds of the states say they examine advisers at least once every four years.Finra inspects brokerage firms roughly every two years. Those more-frequent inspections, however, didn't detect Allen Stanford or Bernard Madoff's Ponzi schemes. "Finra clearly could have done better," its chief executive Richard Ketchum said last year, "and we deeply regret we did not.""An adviser being examined in L.A. faces very different requirements than one being examined in Dallas," says Brian Hamburger, managing director of MarketCounsel, a firm based in Englewood, N.J., that helps advisers comply with financial regulations.Norm Champ, deputy director of the SEC office that examines advisers, concedes that there is some regional variation. "We are addressing that with several steps to make sure the process is more transparent, orderly and consistent," he says, including a manual issued in January that should standardize exams across all of the SEC's 12 offices.Still, regulators might be overlooking the most important issue of all--that your adviser could steal your money while reporting that it's safe and sound.Several advisers and consultants say regulatory examiners don't always ask for independent proof that clients' account balances are accurate. "Many of these guys go through an entire exam without verifying assets," says Mr. Hamburger of MarketCounsel.Troy Daum, head of Wealth Analytics, a financial adviser in San Diego, says his firm has been examined both by SEC and state auditors. "They spend a lot of time looking at minute bits of detail," he says, "but they miss the boat when they don't make sure your performance reports line up."The SEC says it is standard practice for examiners to ask advisers for evidence that clients' account values are accurate. "We generally verify assets on exam visits," says Mr. Champ, "but we may exercise discretion when the circumstances warrant."At the heart of these gaps are antiquated databases and other crude technology that one person who deals regularly with regulators calls "right out of the Raiders of the Lost Ark warehouse."The Self-Regulatory Organization for Independent Investment Advisers, an organization in Oxford, Miss., established last year as a potential alternative to existing oversight agencies, says regulators need to embrace "data analytics." Computers should be parsing vast quantities of information in search of overall patterns and potentially risky exceptions.Imagine that advisers would have to upload standardized reports on all their clients' assets--with personal identification removed--to a national data repository each month. Software would probe for any gaps between the reported account values and independent records from the custodian firms where the money resides.Then, examinations would be driven by what pops out of the data, not by what pops up on the calendar--regardless of which regulator runs the show.To be fair, regulation is inching into the electronic age.An operation at the SEC, the "aberrational performance initiative," uses software to analyze data about hedge funds to look for unusually high or suspiciously smooth relative performance. The API project has already led to four fraud cases--with more in the pipeline, according to people familiar with the matter.Another team at the SEC electronically analyzes large amounts of data on more than 10,000 advisers--but much of the raw information isn't yet in automated form.But much more could be done--at not much higher cost."The next step is getting information more routinely and broadly from firms at the transactional and customer level in a consistent format," says Stephen Luparello, vice chairman at the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, which already uses data analytics to monitor how brokers sell annuities, among other things.To extend existing systems to investment advisers, costs would probably run "a few million dollars a year," reckons Mr. Luparello.That's a lot cheaper than the countless people-hours frittered away by regulators and advisers alike under today's system--or the costs of leaving the next Madoff on the loose.Write to Jason Zweig atCredit: By Jason Zweig