Alex Kurtz, the No. 1 stock picker in the computers and office equipment category, once worked in sales at a tech company. His experience there influences the way he evaluates stocks to this day."I really believe that while technology down at the brass tacks can make a difference in a deal, brute force by a sales force can win deals," he says. In other words, the best technology doesn't always win.That is one reason he talks to 34 technology resellers each quarter, trying to find out not only what technologies are gaining traction in the market, but also how different sales representatives are trying to make their numbers.The approach has served Mr. Kurtz, 37 years old, well and helped him land a job at Sterne Agee andamp; Leach Inc. midway through 2011.Mr. Kurtz's best call in 2011 was OCZ Technology Group Inc., which returned 72% during the 10 months he rated it a buy, compared with a 37% gain for the full year. OCZ makes so-called solid-state drives, an increasingly popular alternative to traditional hard drives in computers. The company was growing quickly and working toward higher margins.Mr. Kurtz also benefited from timing on the call. He left his old firm, Merriman Capital Inc., in April, around when OCZ hit its high for the year. He re-initiated coverage at Sterne Agee in late June, after the stock had declined.If he could have a do-over, Mr. Kurtz says he would have upgraded Fusion-io Inc., a maker of memory technology. Mr. Kurtz says he has "some long-term concerns" about the company's ability to differentiate itself from rivals. However, "in the near term I underestimated their first-to-market advantage," he says.Fusion-io returned 15% during Mr. Kurtz's sell rating. It gained an additional 3.5% after he upgraded it to a hold in late December.Mr. Kurtz was a research analyst at Thomas Weisel Partners before going back to school for his M.B.A. He then joined storage maker EMC Corp., where he held a variety of positions and says he gained "an understanding of how companies really operate internally." He resumed a career as an analyst in 2007, joining Merriman.For this year, Mr. Kurtz likes several companies that help businesses track, manage and act on the data they collect. In particular, he lists EMC, VMware Inc. and F5 Networks Inc. -- all of which have already had significant gains so far this year -- as buys.EMC has made several acquisitions over the past few years, which have set the company up to capitalize on the so-calledbig-datatrend, he says. VMware is coming out with more management tools, which should help boost profits, and F5, he says, "has a lot of irons in the fire."Credit: By Ben Worthen