Gordon Crovitz alleges that "authoritarian regimes want to prohibit people from being anonymous on the Web, which would make it easier to find and arrest dissidents," among the reasons many nations are urging that the U.N. should "run the Internet" ( Information Age, May 7). In fact, all nations, not just authoritarian regimes, favor seeing one agency with responsibility to the world community undertake the role of setting policy for growth and development of the Internet.Now that the Internet has tied the world together and every nation is dependent on fashioning ways to harness the net for economic, political and social success and survival, it is in the U.S.'s interest to accelerate this process. Assuming the network of networks is relatively free and open, it is and will be the continued mechanism for world economic development and, while unstated, a major foreign-policy objective of the U.S.Prof. John M. EgerSan Diego State UniversitySan DiegoMy early career developed in the background of the Arpanet (funded by Darpa that gave us the Internet) culture, where researchers had free access to technical literature. Everyone shared his code and ideas just as freely. This was vital for many derived services and products such as Ethernet, the UNIX operating system and for advanced programming concepts flowing into the industry.Later, I encountered the United Nations and other agency involvement in developing some significant industry standards having to do with metadata standards now reaching into large, enterprise-scale,big-datacomputing. These standards encapsulate some significant information-technology breakthroughs. But here is the catch: This information from the U.N. isn't easily available to the public in its entirety. It costs substantial money for the entrepreneur to navigate through a network of related literature that is also under lock and key. The big corporations and large institutions are already taken care of in their role as sponsors, with an early access to standards. This is thoroughly against the spirit of the entrepreneurial culture that will be needed to drive forward the very technologies and standards that the U.N. wants to manage.If you doubt this, just look at the results compared with the Arpanet/Darpa initiative. The technologies built around the U.N. standards now sit in the hands of a few large companies as part of their proprietary systems. Open-source innovation hasn't been able to use these standards to create tangible value from it for the society at large.Yes, U.N.-Center for Trade Facilitation and Electronic Business needed to raise some capital to develop these standards. But should they be in this business at all if they have to run it as a private enterprise? Free enterprise always found ways to keep some of these crucial elements of technology development available for free and to recoup the costs later through their own proprietary products and services.George ThomasMesa, Ariz.