TWO media rituals took place in New York City last week: the television upfront presentations and the city-sponsored celebration of all things digital, Internet Week.At times, it was hard to tell which was which.At the upfronts, network TV executives spoke the languages of social media and Web science to a greater degree than ever. ABC spoke about designing great "user experiences" just as a Web designer would; both Fox and CBS showed off how many online fans they had on sites like Facebook and Twitter. (Fox says it has 230 million; CBS, 167 million.) Meanwhile, at Internet Week, much of the focus was on video -- specifically the kind of high-quality video that television networks have been producing for decades.The collision between old and new media was sometimes visible in Manhattan -- as when partygoers hopped Thursday night from the CW network's open bar at Colicchio andamp; Sons to the Internet Week closing party at Barry Diller's IAC building two blocks away.The IAC party was a showcase for Aereo, a streaming TV start-up that the networks are suing. "Stretching a metaphor, it's a literal tale of two cities," said Tim Hanlon, a former media agency executive who now runs the Vertere Group, an emerging-media consultancy.At times, the clash between the sides was audible in the networks' defenses of their traditional business models. Yes, the CBS chief executive Leslie Moonves joked about having a page on Pinterest, the social Web site, but the real take-away from his Carnegie Hall presentation on Wednesday was the phrase "first screen first." As the image of a flat-screen television was projected above him, Mr. Moonves said, "We love social media enhancing our product but most importantly, with all of this, everyone is still talking about the first screen."But newer -- and sometimes, smaller -- screens had to be brought up at all the television presentations, if only to satisfy advertising buyers and sellers who spend a lot of time thinking about how to incorporate the Web into their media plans. As the "newfronts" demonstrated -- those were digital versions of upfronts held by YouTube, Hulu, Yahoo, AOL and others earlier this spring -- TV and the Web are slowly looking and sounding more like each other.And network executives want to prove that they're not behind the times. Thus, all the Internet language. Peter Rice, the chairman of the Fox Networks Group, announced a new unit within Fox, internally named the Fox Bridge, that will help advertisers create social media campaigns, branded environments and apps. Mr. Rice said the unit would also "track the social activity of our shows 24/7."Anne Sweeney, the president of the Disney/ABC Television Group, started ABC's upfront by saying, "Our audience is tuning in, logging on, streaming, downloading -- devouring our content any way they can get it."One of her lieutenants, the ABC ad sales chief Geri Wang, followed up by speaking about "big data," as a cloud-computing company would, and "rich social engagement," as Twitter or Facebook would. She promoted the ability of advertisers to buy TV and online ads with one deal and one CPM, short for the cost per thousand viewers. "In a world of fragmentation, we are offering you aggregation," she said.Other networks are increasingly offering the same approach, sometimes in collaboration with Nielsen, sometimes in spite of Nielsen.At one point in Fox's presentation, a pie chart showed viewership of "New Girl," a one-year-old sitcom, among adults ages 18 to 49, the sweet spot for marketers. According to the graph, 80 percent viewed the show on traditional television, either live or sometime later with a digital video recorder. An additional 17 percent viewed the show via a legal online stream like Hulu's. And 3 percent viewed it via a distributor's video-on-demand system. Fox sells ad packages that will place an advertiser in all three formats.Rob Tuck, the executive vice president for national sales at the CW, said his network combined Nielsen and DoubleClick data to sell ads across all its platforms. Mark Pedowitz, president of the CW, said executives also were working with Rentrak, a purveyor of set-top-box data, and another company that "we'll announce at some point.""Let's just say I've become more knowledgeable about Nielsen than I ever wanted to be in my entire life," Mr. Pedowitz added, smiling.The CW pitched itself on Thursday as "the first fully converged network" -- but it has competition on that front. TBS and TNT, two cable channels owned by Turner Broadcasting, rather dramatically said that two years from now, they won't be linear channels, they'll be "branded video destinations" that just happen to have a linear component.ESPN executives talked at length at their upfront about the sports empire's presence on mobile devices, in social media and elsewhere. Sean Bratches, executive vice president for sales and marketing at ESPN, recited a list at one point: "Facebook, Twitter, Netflix, Amazon, YouTube, Xbox."Anthony DiClemente, a media analyst for Barclays, pointed out that there were still some structural impediments to all this mixing of media. "Let's say you're a top 100 advertiser," he said. "You could have multiple agencies -- one is your digital agency, another is your TV agency. And even if you have one agency, there might be different personnel in charge of each.""We need the walls to come down," he added.It may just be a matter of time. Ted Harbert, the chairman of NBC Broadcasting, made news early in the week by criticizing the Dish Network for a feature that automatically skips all ads on most prime-time network shows. The networks are trying to pressure Dish to turn off the feature. But Mr. Harbert acknowledged that his own viewing patterns were starting to change."Last year I complained about how my kids watch TV," he said, referring to jokes he made at the previous year's upfront presentation. "But now, I am them. I caved. I'll watch TV on my iPhone. But I'm drawing the line on my watch."