Hewlett-Packard Co. is laying off 27,000 workers as part of a massive restructuring plan to stem its declining profits and revenues, underlining the growing gulf between the technology industry's old guard and new generation.H-P said the job cuts, which amount to about 8% of its workforce, will take place over the next two years. It projects the move, once complete, will save $3 billion to $3.5 billion annually, with most of the savings going to fund new efforts such as cloud computing and "big data" analytics.The technology giant outlined its restructuring plan as it posted a 31% profit drop and a 3% revenue decline for its fiscal second quarter. The results were ahead of H-P's projections, sending the company's stock up 9% in after-hours trading.H-P's chief executive, Meg Whitman, said she was "cautiously optimistic" the computer, printer and technology services company had turned the corner.Still, the results were H-P's third consecutive quarter of revenue and profit declines. Overall, H-P has racked up about $5 billion in restructuring charges over the last seven years, according to advisory firm Evercore Partners, as it has tried various ways to rev up its growth.H-P's announcement followed rival Dell Inc.'s lackluster quarterly results on Tuesday. Dell, which cited a pullback in tech spending and its own inability to close deals, had its stock hammered on Wednesday, with shares plunging more than 17% to $12.49. Earlier this month, networking-gear maker Cisco Systems Inc. also gave a lower-than-expected outlook for its current quarter, driving its stock down.Dell's decline Wednesday erased $4.6 billion from its market value and weighed on other technology stocks. H-P shares hit a new 52-week low Wednesday before ending down 3.2% at $21.08 in 4 p.m. trading on the New York Stock Exchange. In late trading, H-P shares rebounded to $22.99.While H-P and Dell made their names in personal computers and server computers, the tech landscape has shifted in recent years. Computing has moved from desktop computers and laptops to mobile gadgets such as smartphones and tablets, markets that H-P and Dell are largely sitting out. New technologies such as social networking have enabled a wave of app makers to thrive.Investors are increasingly valuing some of these younger companies highly, in part based on predictions of future growth. Facebook Inc., despite a fumbled initial public offering, now has a market capitalization of $85 billion. Even start-ups with no revenue or profits are fetching billion-dollar plus valuations; last week, online scrapbooking site Pinterest snagged a $1.5 billion valuation.In contrast, H-P's market cap has fallen more than 40% over the past year to $42 billion. Dell's market cap is now at $22 billion, down almost 20% over the same period.The companies' declines are unfolding even as tech spending is expected to grow this year. According to research company Gartner, world-wide tech spending is expected to rise 2.5% in 2012 to $3.8 trillion."H-P's core businesses in a lot of areas are eroding and all the company seems to come up with is cut heads and cut costs," said Rob Cihra, an analyst at Evercore Partners.Ms. Whitman took over H-P in September and has tried to restore stability to the company. Her predecessor, Leo Apotheker, was fired after several quarters of lackluster results and the announcement of an ambitious plan to spin off the company's PC business--a plan Ms. Whitman later canceled. Before that, Mark Hurd resigned as CEO following an internal ethics probe.In an interview Wednesday, Ms. Whitman said she is working "to strike that appropriate balance between the amount of change that is necessary to position H-P for the future and the amount of change that the organization can absorb."The company expects to record a pre-tax charge of approximately $1.7 billion in its current fiscal year for the restructuring efforts and $1.8 billion in charges in future years. It will also book a charge of $1.2 billion to write down the value of its Compaq brand.In the latest quarter, H-P's personal computer group, the world's largest, was the only major business that grew, and it was effectively flat with revenue of $9.5 billion.H-P's printer revenue declined 10% from a year ago to $6.1 billion, and revenue in its services group fell 1% to $8.8 billion. H-P's group that makes products for businesses such as servers and storage systems saw revenue fall 6% to $5.2 billion.Revenue in H-P's small-by-comparison software group increased 22% to $970 million, largely because of a $10.3 billion acquisition of Autonomy Corp. last year. But Ms. Whitman said Autonomy's revenue was down from a year earlier when it was a standalone entity, and that she was replacing the head of that business. Mike Lynch, Autonomy's founder, will leave H-P, the company said."We're starting to stabilize," Cathie Lesjak, H-P's chief financial officer, said in an interview, adding the company has been clear about the challenges it faces. "We aren't doing a lot of high fives at this point."Overall, H-P's income for the period ended April 30 fell to $1.6 billion, or 80 cents a share, from $2.3 billion, or $1.05 a share, a year ago. Revenue shrank to $30.7 billion from $31.6 billion.H-P raised its full-year earnings-per-share outlook, in part due to the job cuts. It expects to spend about $1.7 billion as a result of the restructuring this fiscal year and another $1.8 billion through October 2014.Ms. Lesjak said the economy was "challenging," particularly in Europe. But she stressed that H-P, despite its struggles, is on steady ground. "We are heads down doing what we said we would do and executing," she said.Write to Ben Worthen atCorrections andamp; AmplificationsResearch firm Gartner expects world-wide technology spending to increase 2.5% in 2012. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said Gartner expects that increase in 2010.Credit: By Ben Worthen