CORRECTION APPENDEDSAN FRANCISCO -- As the computer industry makes a radical shift to new modes of computing -- in the cloud and on tablets and smartphones -- Hewlett-Packard, a stalwart of the previous era, finds it hard to keep up.It is not alone in that struggle. H.P., along with well-established tech companies like Dell and Cisco Systems, is contending with a faster-than-expected move by consumers and businesses from personal computers and small racks of computer servers toward mobile phones and tablets that are connected to millions of servers, all lashed together in remote supercomputing "clouds."The new systems are cheaper and more flexible, which businesses found appealing in a slow-growing economy. As for consumers, they have been dazzled by the new devices and abilities of those devices enabled by the cloud.So far, however, the industry shift has rewarded upstarts like Amazon.com, which has become a premier cloud provider to business, and Apple, which reinvented itself with smartphones and tablets. The old guard in enterprise computing, particularly H.P., has struggled with a new technology order that squeezed profit margins and made many older products unattractive.This was obvious on Wednesday, when H.P. reported revenue and net income below year-earlier levels, although both exceeded Wall Street's expectations.H.P. said it would cut its ranks by 27,000 employees, or 7.7 percent of a global work force of 349,600. Many of the jobs are in the United States. H.P. hopes to save as much as $3.5 billion a year from the restructuring, most of which it would put toward cloud-based businesses, like computer security and analysis of large data troves.Wall Street applauded the results. Shares rose 9 percent in after-hours trading. H.P.'s chief executive, Meg Whitman, however, warned that real success was a long way off."We don't aspire to have a 3 percent decline in revenues," she said in an interview after the earnings announcement. "There are big changes going on, and we have to position ourselves."She also vowed that H.P., which had revenue of $127.2 billion in its last fiscal year, "will be much bigger," both in employees and revenue. She did not provide a timeline, however.H.P., headquartered in Palo Alto, Calif., reported net income in its second fiscal quarter, ended April 30, dropped 31 percent, to $1.59 billion, or 80 cents a share, from $2.3 billion, or $1.05, in the period a year ago. Revenue fell 3 percent, to $30.69 billion.H.P.'s results followed similar news from its archrival Dell on Tuesday. That computer company reported that its first fiscal quarter's net income fell 33 percent, to $635 million, while revenue slid 4 percent, to $14.4 billion. Dell reported a 12 percent decline in consumer revenue, and smaller declines in both business and government sales. Dell's stock plunged 17 percent Wednesday on the earnings report -- which, unlike Hewlett-Packard's, came in below analysts' forecasts.Earlier this month, Cisco reported a 22 percent increase in net income after its own corporate restructuring over the last year, but warned of falling demand, in part because of Europe's faltering economy.Ms. Whitman, whose company makes computer networking gear too, also said she was troubled by Europe.She said H.P. "has an opportunity in cloud that no one else does." It is still among the world's largest providers of servers and data storage systems for privately run clouds, used by companies not comfortable with having their data on commodity systems like Amazon's. Sales of advanced storage and networking systems rose rapidly.Software delivered over cloud computing is typically less profitable, since it is effectively rented cheaply, without a lucrative service contract. "We have an advantage, because we are not running a $30 billion business, just $5 billion," she said, arguing that Wall Street would punish traditional software companies more.Of all H.P.'s competitors, I.B.M. has fared best in the transition to the mobility and cloud world. I.B.M. has bet billions on the cloud-based business ofbig dataanalysis. In its most recent quarter, however, I.B.M. reported flat sales but improved profits because of tight management.Ms. Whitman, who took control of the company last September, said H.P. had to reposition itself quickly, but also said it would have enough time, since its largest corporate customers would move gradually to full cloud computing. "We're not lagging in the transition to the cloud," she said. "The enterprise changes slowly."A. M. Sacconaghi, an analyst with Bernstein Research, said he expected the change would come slowly. "It's going to be a PC, printer and enterprise hardware company. Can they build that up to resonate more with what customers are buying today? Yes. In five years, will you see a new $20 billion line of business? No."Mr. Sacconaghi said H.P. could, over the long term, grow at 2 percent. With tighter management, that could make it a very profitable big company in the new world.He said Ms. Whitman was out to change H.P. without putting it through a traumatic transformation, unlike previous recent chief executives like Carly Fiorina and Leo Apotheker. Mark V. Hurd managed the company tightly rather than radically, though he too was pushed out."C.E.O.'s who try to transform H.P. end badly," Mr. Sacconaghi said. "C.E.O.'s who embrace the company, like Hurd and so far Whitman, do considerably better."Online Correction: May 23, 2012, WednesdayThis article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article published online misstated a forecast made before Hewlett-Packard's earnings announcement. A survey of analysts had projected 73 cents a share in net income according to generally accepted accounting principles, a level the company's results surpassed. The article also included an outdated figure for the company's work force."There Are Big Changes Going On, and We Have to Position Ourselves," Said Meg Whitman, Hewlett-Packard's Chief Executive. (Photograph by Paul Sakuma/Associated Press) (B2)