Global Payments Inc., the payments processor that was hit earlier this year with abig databreach, said the incident may have been broader than initially estimated.The Atlanta-based company said it now believes that thieves may have gained access to personal information from its merchant customers. The company said it still believes that data from up to 1.5 million accounts were actually stolen in the breach."It is unclear whether the intruders looked at or took any personal information from the company's systems," the company said in a news release.The development confirms a report last month by The Wall Street Journal that said the breach may have exposed more data to fraud. The new details involved a database of merchants that have applied to Global Payments for transaction processing.The wider scope underscores the difficultly in assessing the damage that follows hacker attacks.Global Payments isn't a household name but touches the financial data of millions of consumers each day in its role as a card-processing middleman between merchants and banks. The company was the nation's seventh-largest "merchant acquirer" last year, handling $120.6 billion of transactions rung up on Visa Inc. and MasterCard Inc. cards, according to the Nilson Report, a newsletter based in Carpinteria, Calif.Global Payments said it has provided more card numbers to card companies so that they can monitor cardholder activity. The company has said thieves stole account numbers and other data, such as card-expiration dates and security codes."We sincerely apologize for this incident and are working diligently to conclude our investigation," said Paul Garcia, Global Payments' chief executive and chairman. "We are outraged by these criminal acts."Global Payments didn't identify the merchants that may have been affected. The company also didn't address whether the length of the exposure was greater than its original estimate of between Jan. 21 and Feb. 25.The Journal last month reported that the increase reflects new information that showed thieves could have had access to customer data since last spring."The company has made substantial progress in its investigation and remediation efforts," Global Payments said, reiterating comments that it believes the incident is contained. It said it will provide additional information, including the potential financial impact, no later than its next earnings call on July 26.It isn't yet clear what kind of impact the breach may have had on cardholders. Banks and merchants have linked few suspicious transactions to the incident so far. Still, the breach prompted Visa and MasterCard to remove Global Payments from their lists of third-party vendors that comply with industry security standards.Write to Robin Sidel atCredit: By Robin Sidel