Correction: The Appointments column on the June 18 Washington Business pages, in an item about the University of Maryland naming Peter Weiler vice president for university relations and president of the University of Maryland College  Park Foundation, incorrectly placed the university in Greenbelt. It is in College Park.CompaniesAbt Associates of the District appointed Diana Silimperi division vice president for international health.Artel of Reston appointed Augustine J. Ponturiero director of managed network services.Avalere Health of the District appointed Sandy W. Robinson vice president in its reimbursement and commercialization practice.Buck Consultants of the District appointed Tamara M. Simon managing director.Cadmus Group of Arlington appointed Ellen Field principal in the strategic communications and market transformation division.Deloitte of the District appointed Jonathan Traub, former staff director for the Committee on Ways and Means, to its Washington national tax practice and Gary L. Perlin to its board of directors.Edgeworth Economics of the District appointed Laila Haider senior vice president.Envision EMI of Vienna appointed John B. Richards chief executive officer.Ernst andamp; Young of the District appointed Jeff Johnson executive director in the Americas Advisory Center of Excellence.MicroPact of Herndon appointed Sandra W. Levy director of legal services.Mona Electric Group of Clinton appointed Alan Fruend chief financial officer.Northern Virginia Graphics of Fairfax appointed Peter R. Kosztolnik president.RIS of the District appointed Sue Drabkin executive pastry chef.RxAlly of Leesburg appointed Peter C. Duran vice president and chief privacy officer.Sapling Pictures of Fairfax appointed Robert Anderson chief development officer.StoneTurn Group of the District appointed Joseph Cheriathundam managing director of its data analytics practice.Associations/nonprofitsAeras of Rockville appointed Barry Bloom to its board of directors.Aluminum Association of Arlington appointed John Weritz vice president of standards and technology.American Cleaning Institute of the District appointed Gail Tannenbaum manager of meeting services.American Land Title Association of the District Stewart Morris to its board.Capital Area Food Bank of the District appointed president and chief executive of Pepco Energy Services, John U. Huffman, and senior vice president of TASC's defense/civil group, John P. Hynes, to its board of directors.Electric Drive Transportation Association of the District appointed Christine Rogala director of public relations and Kimberly Grever new membership director.Healthy Communities Institute of the District appointed former United Nations ambassador Kevin Moley, to its board of directors.Mesothelioma Applied Research Foundation of Alexandria appointed Sean Haynie director of development and Tee Morris social media and content manager.National Association of Chain Drug Stores of Alexandria appointed Thomas A. O'Donnell vice president of federal government affairs.National Council on Aging of the District appointed Sarah Ruiz deputy director of self-management alliance.Partnership for Public Service of the District appointed Mark Roth to its technical advisory committee.SOS Children's Villages USA of the District appointed Lynn M. Croneberger chief executive.TechAmerica Foundation of the District appointed senior technologist and solutions architect at GTSI, Prem Jadhwani, commissioner on the foundation'sBig DataCommission.US-China Business Council of the District appointed Robert A. McDonald, chief executive of Proctor andamp; Gamble, chair.EducationGeorge Washington University of the District appointed Bernard J. Davisson associate vice president for principal gifts.University of Maryland of Greenbelt appointed Peter Weiler vice president for university relations and president of the University of Maryland College Park Foundation.Real estateCBRE of the District appointed Paul Graham first vice president.FinanceCardinal Bank of McLean appointed Sokhea Ean assistant vice president of banking officer manager in the retail banking division.LegalFulbright andamp; Jaworski of the District appointed Michael J. Rumstum and Jeffrey J. Williamson senior counsels.Hogan Lovells of the District appointed Christine Bloomquist partner in the health practice.Kandamp;L Gates of the District appointed K. Susan Grafton partner in the investment management practice.Kalbian Hagerty of the District appointed Mark Barondess partner in the litigation group.Kilpatrick Townsend andamp; Stockton of the District appointed Paul Aguggia chair and Gary Bronstein leader of the financial institutions team.Miller andamp; Chevalier of the District appointed Kevin M. Downing criminal tax practice member and Barbara D. Linney member in the export controls and economic sanctions practice.Murphy andamp; McGonigle of the District appointed Matthew B. Comstock partner.Nelson Mullins Riley andamp; Scarborough of the District appointed David Main to its national health-care practice group.Vinson andamp; Elkins of the District appointed Nitin Sathe counsel in the mergers and acquisition and private equity practice.Send information about promotions, appointments and personnel moves in the Washington area to Appointments, Business News, The Washington Post, 1150 15th St. NW, Washington, D.C. 20071-5302, or to appointments@washpost.com.