A supercomputer installed at a U.S. laboratory has achieved the top speed rating in the world, ending Japan's one-year reign atop a closely watched ranking of machines considered crucial for scientific research and national defense.The record-setting debut of an International Business Machines Corp. system at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory comes as scientists in a growing number of countries are trying out different hardware approaches to win bragging rights in scientific computing. Companies that are targeting new computer chips for supercomputers include Intel Corp. and Nvidia Corp., as well as IBM.IBM's Sequoia system was able to carry out 16 quadrillion calculations a second, or petaflops, according to a benchmark used to compile a semiannual list of the world's 500 most powerful computers. It displaced a system from Japan's Fujitsu Ltd., called K Computer, which last year won the top speed rating.Supercomputers are used to solve some of the toughest scientific problems, such as simulating nuclear explosions, forecasting long-term climate changes and mapping underground oil and gas deposits. Also, some longtime supercomputer makers, including Cray Inc. and Silicon Graphics International Corp., have recently begun selling machines for so-calledbig-dataproblems, such as studying stock-trading patterns and user actions on the Web.Once considered a mature industry, the room-sized installations have been selling more quickly than conventional server systems. Revenue for supercomputers priced at more than $500,000 jumped 14% to $976 million in the first quarter, according to market-research firm IDC.The field has long been dominated by the U.S., but challengers keep popping up. A system in China called Tianhe-1A surprised market watchers in 2010 by grabbing the top spot on the list, known as the Top500. A system from Japan's NEC Corp. held the speed crown for more than two years in the previous decade, prompting U.S. government agencies to boost research spending in the field."It's good to see a little competition going back and forth," Cray Chief Executive Peter Ungaro said regarding Sequoia's top ranking. "I fully expect Japan and China and Europe to strike back."Supercomputer makers originally designed their own internal circuitry. In the 1990s, however, many companies began assembling systems using hundreds--and, eventually, thousands--of chips from Intel and Advanced Micro Devices Inc., using a design called x86 that was first used in personal computers.But building supercomputers from ever-larger numbers of such components is impractical, largely because the resulting systems consume too much power. The result is that companies in recent years have enhanced x86-based machines with other chips that can accelerate specific kinds of tasks.For example, many of the world's largest machines now use chips from Nvidia or AMD that were designed to manage graphics in personal computers. Intel, meanwhile, has developed an accessory chip, known by the code name Knight's Corner, with the core circuitry of more than 50 x86 microprocessors.IBM's system at Lawrence Livermore, by contrast, is based on a design called Blue Gene/Q that uses new chips the company designed itself to boost performance while saving energy. Each has 16 processors, based on a technology called Power that long has been used in the company's servers.Using specialty accelerator chips works well for some chores, said Ambuj Goyal, general manager of development and manufacturing for IBM's systems-and-technology group. But a more general-purpose architecture like Sequoia provides greater flexibility to do more jobs without extensively rewriting software, he said.IBM's Blue Gene/Q design took four of the top 10 spots in the latest Top500 list, compared with just the No. 2 position in the November ranking.Sequoia occupies 96 computer racks, each taller than a refrigerator, and exploits the equivalent of 1.6 million calculating engines. It is estimated to be about eight times more power-efficient than an existing system at the lab based on a design called BlueGene/L.Researchers at the lab in Livermore, Calif., which is 44 miles east of San Francisco, plan to use the system to improve simulations used to judge the effectiveness and safety of nuclear weapons, a mission overseen by the Department of Energy's National Nuclear Security Administration.The TOP500 list, scheduled for release Monday at a supercomputer conference in Germany, is compiled by researchers at Germany's University of Mannheim, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of Tennessee at Knoxville.Credit: By Don Clark