A new approach to computer networking promises to refashion the data center, creating a crop of start-ups that are forcing old-guard vendors like Cisco Systems Inc. and Juniper Networks Inc. to shift strategies.While most equipment in computer rooms have received major upgrades in the past decade, devices called routers and switches that move data around function largely the same way. That is causing network bottlenecks and creating opportunities for technology called software-defined networking, or SDN.Backers say the software will make networks cheaper to build, faster to configure and more efficient to operate. It is already winning over big customers like Google Inc. and spawning a new set of start-ups aiming to grab a piece of the data center."This is one of the most significant things to come along in the last 10 years in networking," says Mike Volpi, a former executive at Cisco who is now a partner at Index Ventures.Traditionally, much of the intelligence for controlling data communications is spread around a network, managed by proprietary software that comes with each vendor's gear. In the SDN approach, those control functions are split off to be managed by one central program, which may be run on an inexpensive server system.Using SDN, businesses could partition their networks for private use. Bankers, for example, could share confidential financial data securely. Other network features like security firewalls that often require a separate piece of hardware can be added as applications software, which could make networks cheaper and easier manage.It is similar to what happened a few years ago when companies such as VMware Inc. began offering virtualization software that made it possible to run more than one program on a single server system. Suddenly, information-technology departments could set up programs with a few mouse clicks instead of taking days or weeks to install servers and software.After virtualization changed the management of data centers, networking became a bottleneck. It was quick to set up a new application that allowed a bank to crunch financial information, say, but IT staff still had to manually configure networks so the data could be shared securely.SDN can change that, says Rohit Mehra, an analyst at research company IDC. Using the architecture, such secure connections could be created instantly.While the market for these types of products is small now, only about $50 million this year, Mr. Mehra expects it to grow to about $2 billion by 2016.Rackspace Hosting Inc., abig data-center operator that runs applications for businesses, has been testing SDN for two years and in April started using it for some of its 180,000 customers.When a customer outgrows its current space in a Rackspace data center, the company sometimes needs to physically reconfigure the part of the network the customer is using. That can take days now, but could eventually be reduced to minutes using SDN, says Lew Moorman, president of Rackspace.The San Antonio company now has about 1,000 of its customers using SDN and in August will start the next phase of its project, which will eventually cover 60,000 customers.Rackspace uses software from Nicira Inc., one of the start-ups that helped pioneer the SDN approach based on research from a Stanford University research lab."We thought it was important to think of networking as a software problem," say Nick McKeown, the professor who ran the lab. His team figured out a way to control Stanford's network with a few low-cost switches, some software, and a single PC.Mr. McKeown along with Martin Casado and Scott Shenker founded Nicira to commercialize the technology with a focus on large commercial data centers. The company, which has raised $50 million in venture capital since launching in 2007, shipped its first product last year.Meanwhile, in 2010 one of Mr. McKeown's researchers, Guido Appenzeller, founded Big Switch Networks Inc., which in April raised $13.75 million in funding, from Mr. Volpi's Index Ventures, among others.Industry trendsetters are paying attention. At a conference in April, Google executive Urs Holzle said the search giant has spent the last two years redesigning the network that connects its data centers so that it is entirely SDN. He said the move saves money and makes the network easier to test and manage.For all its promise, just how fast the technology will spread remains unclear. One reason is that entrenched players like Cisco and Juniper have a vested interest in the status quo. They make big margins on the current switches they sell; with SDN, a customer could buy less-expensive switches and use software from the likes of Nicira or Big Switch to manage its network.But they can't afford to leave the emerging field to competitors, says Mr. Mehra, the IDC analyst. Earlier this month, Cisco announced plans to embrace the technology.Cisco also has invested $100 million in a start-up with SDN technology called Insieme, which it has rights to buy for up to $750 million.Juniper, too, says it is on board, planning to roll out its first SDN products within a year. "We see SDN as a very, very strong opportunity," Pradeep Sindhu, the company's chief technology officer, said at a meeting for financial analysts this month.Credit: By Ben Worthen