TORONTO-- The Canadian dollar marched higher against a broadly lower U.S. dollar Wednesday.Investors were snapping up higher-yielding assets, encouraged by some positive U.S. corporate earnings reports that suggested underlying growth in some segments of the economy, while at the same time broadly selling U.S. dollar on renewed expectations of further stimulus from the U.S. Federal Reserve because of weakness in others.The U.S. dollar was at C$1.0157 late Wednesday, from C$1.0223 late Tuesday, according to data provider CQG.In data Wednesday, sales of newly built homes in the U.S. tumbled unexpectedly in June to its lowest level in five months, suggesting continued weakness in the world's largest economy.However, a report from The Wall Street Journal that suggested Federal Reserve might be moving closer to adopting fresh easing measures delivered a silver lining to what was otherwise discouraging data."Some of the comments about the Fed having to do something sooner, rather than later, in The Wall Street Journal article has caused a little bit of a rally in equities, and that's helped the Canadian dollar," said Dave Bradley, managing director at Scotiabank in Toronto.Some investors waded into the equity market, with which the loonie is tightly correlated, encouraged by healthy earnings reports early Wednesday from Caterpillar (CAT) and Boeing Co. (BA), and the hope for further easing from the Fed.Those unexpectedly strong reports helped to taper worries brought by Apple's (AAPL) rare earnings disappointment late Tuesday, although the equity rally faded in afternoon trading, leaving U.S. indexes mixed at the close.Commodities were mostly higher, with oil, gold and silver in positive territory in late afternoon trading.There were no significant data releases Wednesday in the U.S. or Canada.Thursday brings a slew of U.S. indicators, including June durable goods orders and the initial weekly jobless claims report. There are nobig datareleases for Canada Thursday.Write to Karen Johnson at karen.johnson@dowjones.comCredit: By Karen Johnson