Nothing forces creativity like limited resources. With federal budgets on the decline, innovation is coming to the D.C. region's government technology sector.The pressures on the government budget are real. Even if sequestration is avoided, the Office of Management and Budget has instructed agencies to plan their fiscal 2014 IT spending by averaging what they spent from 2010 to 2012, and cutting that number by 10 percent.Industry is concerned about the cuts. In a recent Deltek survey, industry IT executives were more likely than agency IT leaders to say the federal technology budget will decrease over the next three years.Those restrictions have agency heads looking for ways to modernize their IT infrastructure while saving money, and industry positioning itself to win business doing just that.A new Deltek report on the federal information technology market between 2012 and 2017 sees five trends driving IT innovation in the coming years:Cloud computing. In 2010, agencies were directed to identify three projects to move to Internet-based applications and complete one by the end of that year. Deltek's analysis shows that the vast majority of the migrations completed thus far are low-risk, software-as-a-service technologies, such as e-mail and collaboration tools.But by 2017, analysts report, more involved platform-as-a-service technologies will need to move to the cloud. This work offers more cost-saving opportunities as data centers are closed under the current consolidation effort.Mobile computing. Earlier this month, Dave McClure of the General Services Administration called for the federal shift to mobile devices to speed up. As part of the digital government strategy, GSA is writing a 12-month road map with specific milestones for agencies to move Web sites to mobile-friendly formats, he said.Consolidation.Data center consolidation should rapidly gain steam. Agencies have identified 1,200 federal data centers that can be closed or consolidated, but, as of June, had closed just 268. To meet targets, they'll have to close 627 more by September 2013.That will push federal buyers to spend on virtualization and other technologies that help them reduce their server footprint.Big data. The government collects enormous amounts of data. Analyzing it properly could help agencies find ways to meet their missions more effectively and at a lower cost.The administration launched abig dataresearch and development initiative in March, announcing more than $200 million in new commitments meant to improve the tools and techniques used to access, organize and pull meaningful insights from huge volumes of digital data. To do that, they'll need to invest in technologies to store and analyze data and contractors who know how to make sense of it.Cybersecurity. Even as spending contracts in other areas, federal agencies face growing challenges in securing their data. When Deltek analysts asked both government and private industry experts to identify the biggest IT security challenges, the two groups agreed that finding secure ways to share information, detecting intrusions and implementing standards to guard against internal threats were the top three.Sean Tucker is assistant managing editor at Herndon-based Deltek, which researches the government contracting market and can be found at www.deltek.com.