It is, in a very small way, something of a personal anniversary. It is almost two years since I last wrote a line of code*.In a previous life I was a self-taught Web developer. I would compare myself to the difference between a jobbing carpenter and a cabinet maker. I could do the digital equivalent of cutting a reasonable mortice-and-tenon, but marqueterie and cutting fine dovetails? Leave that to the professionals.Learning to write code has become something of a trendy thing to do. New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg has said he intends to learn code this year. Estonia has recently announced a scheme with the aim of getting every 6-year-old in the Baltic state to learn programming skills.The demand has spawned a number of start-ups offering coding lessons. , which teaches off-line courses, has recently opened up in London and is recruiting ahead of a launch in Berlin. On-line education site landed $10 million to expand from its home base in New York. Zach Simms, the 22-year-old co-founder, said in an earlier interview with The Wall Street Journal that not everyone has to learn to code, but everybody "needs to learn the notions of algorithms, realizing what you can use code for."But do they? Do nontechnical entrepreneurs of digital start-ups need to learn code? Is understanding the intricacies of Django, or the difference between models, views and controllers, more important than learning how to sell your product or market your services? Among European entrepreneurs we polled, the answer is mixed.On the one hand Ryan Gallagher, CEO of London-based , a voice-based platform and who writes code, was insistent. "Coding is a must," he said. "If you are going to build a technology company, you should know what is possible. You can open a restaurant if you can't cook, but not if you are the first and possibly only employee."But others were not so sure. While supportive of teaching children to code, Nick Halstead, chief technology officer of abig-datastart-up near London and himself a coder, is unimpressed. "This new idea that 'everyone' should code is just because it is fashionable."Adding to the pool of 'bad' programmers is a bad thing, and will create a round of badly educated people making shoddy decisions when they are half educated. To become a real programmer takes a decade of commitment."Taavet Hinrikus, co-founder at Estonia's , suggested that there had to be a level of understanding. "As businesses become digitally native it's critical that the founding/managing teams are able to understand and navigate the digital world inside out, otherwise you lose because you'll be slower than the others."That level of understanding, and an ability to "talk the talk" also gives entrepreneurs an air of authority. "In my experience, software engineers have a hard time taking seriously somebody who can't code," said Benoit Curdy of , a Dublin start-up developing technology for voice applications. "A start-up CEO who can't code will need to be protected from his own team by his CTO. Not optimal at all."But just because an entrepreneur can code, does it mean he or she should? No, says computer engineer Thibauld Favre of Paris-based , a Windows app store. "Knowing how to code does help during the first years when you quickly need to transform your idea into a product. But after that, your ability to code becomes less relevant as you then need to focus on all the rest: recruiting, sales, marketing, planning, etc. ...The hardest part when you know how to code is knowing when you should quit coding."But if an entrepreneur can't code, should he learn? Almost universally amongst noncoders, the answer was no. William Heath, co-founderof , a personal-data-storing start-up based in London, said he always intended to. " 'Intend to' in the way one intends to lose weight. Coding as a core skill may offer a misleading lesson. You can control what you code, but most of what you encounter as an entrepreneur you can't control; you have to work with it and adapt it."Entrepreneurs have many pressing calls on their time, suggested engineer Sindhu Joseph, founder of Barcelona-based . which uses artificial intelligence to handle customer complaints. Learning a skill that others can do better "is not practical," she said. "If I were starting a business today and I did not know coding, I would rather focus on my leadership skills and sales and marketing.""The two most important skills for any entrepreneur are to prioritize scarce resources of labor and money," said Katrin Buckenmaier, co-founder and CEO of Moscow's travel-booking service , "and to build a founding team which has complimentary skills." Hiring was also singled out by Alexandra Chong, CEO of social network . "Entrepreneurs should spend their time on what they're good at, and hire wisely to fill the gaps. Hiring is the most important thing. It's a real skill, as much as coding is."So what should entrepreneurs spend their time on? Kadri Ugand, co-founder of Tallinn, Estonia,-based , was clear and succinct. "What should they spend their time on? Execution."*It was in a language called Ruby and read:"Section.stub(:new).and_return(mock_section)".Credit: By Ben Rooney