The two venture-capital firms that backed the most up-and-comers on this year's top 50 venture-backed companies list got to those spots through completely different approaches.DAG Ventures, a Palo Alto, Calif., venture firm, was the investor with the most start-ups--10--on this year's annual ranking of venture-backed companies. Right behind DAG was another Palo Alto firm, Accel Partners, that funded nine companies on the list.The two venture firms invest in companies using different strategies, underlining how there is no cookie-cutter approach to picking start-up winners.Accel bets heavily on finding the entrepreneur in the garage who has a nascent idea. Although it also invests in more mature companies through a growth fund, Accel often aims to be the first institutional money into the start-up, nurturing the business along to an eventual sale or initial public offering.In contrast, DAG doesn't typically invest in companies until they are further along, often picking investments based on whether top venture firms previously put money into the start-up. DAG also doesn't take board seats like Accel does.The two firms' dissimilar investment methods are complementary, with DAG often investing later in companies that are already backed by Accel. For example, Accel invested in lifestyle content company Glam Media Inc., which is No. 10 on this year's list, in 2005. DAG followed into Glam in 2006 after an Accel venture capitalist called DAG to talk about the company, said DAG managing director John Cadeddu.Both firms also co-invested in peer-to-peer lending company Prosper Marketplace Inc., which is fourth on this year's list. Accel invested in the San Francisco company in 2005, and DAG came in 2007.Together, Accel and DAG have co-invested in 28 companies, according to an analysis by Dow Jones VentureSource, which, like The Wall Street Journal, is a unit of News Corp.DAG's investments that made the list this year span a variety of sectors. They include a healthcare company, NeuroPace Inc., which develops an anti-epileptic-seizure system, as well as mobile payments company Boku Inc. and social-marketing company Lithium Technologies Inc.DAG was started in 1991 as private equity firm Duff Ackerman andamp; Goodrich and went into venture investing about a decade ago. It is winding down the private equity side, said Mr. Cadeddu.He said DAG's philosophy is to pick the strong entrepreneur backed by top venture investors and to have "no ego" in the equation. Several of the firm's Web investments have recently gone public, including social games maker Zynga Inc. last year and local-reviews site Yelp Inc. earlier this year.Meanwhile, Accel is riding a hot streak. It is best known for partner Jim Breyer's early investment in Facebook Inc.; Accel put $12.7 million into the social network in 2005 and has since reaped a multi-billion dollar bonanza. The firm has also backed other newly public companies such as Groupon Inc. and Kayak Software Corp.Accel partner Ping Li said its assortment of companies on this year's list--which also includes Facebook-based professional networking app Branchout Inc. and storage-technology company Nimble Storage Inc.--reflect how the venture firm is confident that shifting technology trends affecting consumers and businesses are continuing to create investment opportunities."There are interesting things happening across the board, so it's been very busy and isn't slowing down," said Mr. Li, naming mobile technologies andBig Dataas among the trends to watch. He predicted "the next 12 months will stay busy on the investment side."Mr. Li added that the firm's Facebook win, which produced one of the biggest venture returns ever, hasn't led to Accel slowing down. "When you have an opportunity like Facebook, you should be working harder because you have a tailwind from the investment," he said.Other venture-capital firms that backed a substantial number of companies on this year's top 50 list include New Enterprise Associates, with eight start-ups in the rankings; and Mayfield Fund, Meritech Capital Partners, Crosslink Capital and Sequoia Capital, with each backing five companies that made this year's list.Write to Pui-Wing Tam atCredit: By Pui-Wing Tam