Ifbig dataand other technologies are transforming enterprise, then what effect will they have on the not-for-profit sector? It is an area that is typically strong on good will but short on innovation.Although exact figures are hard to come by, it represents a significant chunk of the economy. A 2009 report for the U.S. Congress estimated that charitable organizations employ more than 7% of the U.S. workforce, while the broader nonprofit sector is estimated to employ 10%.A new breed of organization born in the heart of the digital disruption is using all the tools that the Internet, and in particular social media, afford to drive fundraising, raise awareness and more important, to help boost efficiency, delivering more returns.The recruitment poster boy for these Young Turks is Charity: water, a campaigning group set up by Scott Harrison, a former nightclub promoter, to bring clean drinking water to the world's poor. For Mr. Harrison, who built the charity into a multimillion-dollar operation, technology is transformative through its ability to link individual projects to individual supporters."Charity: water is able to show donors their specific impact at a level of detail that simply wasn't possible 10 years ago," he said. "We provide GPS coordinates, photographs and community information of every project; and for those supporters fundraising and donating on mycharitywater.org, we tie every donated dollar to an actual project with our Dollars to Projects product."But Mr. Harrison wants to go one better; he wants to ramp up the data side of the operation. "We're currently working to build a system of sensors and other monitoring and evaluation technologies that will provide real-time status of water projects to ensure water is flowing over time."This emphasis on data to drive execution is also crucial for Jake Porway, who heads up DataKind, an organization that brings together pro-bono data scientists with third sector groups to show them how data can transform their organizations."As we see a shift in the use of technology by charities, for example the rise in mobile technologies for providing services, we're seeing new sources of data created from the use of these services that can be valuable to a range of organizations," he said. "We've seen NGOs who provide health care to disadvantaged rural areas via cellphone and, aside from creating a great service for people with little access to health care, they're also inadvertently collecting real-time data about the health conditions in the areas they serve, data that could be used to, for example, predict an early outbreak."For Mr. Harrison, data is also a driver to greater efficiency. "Ultimately additional data will force all charities and agencies that work in the space to raise the bar. We like to call it 'uncomfortable transparency.'"But while third-sector organizations like Charity: Water and DataKind were born in an Internet age and are run by charismatic young leaders who are comfortable with technology, a great many charities are both considerably older, and substantially less well supported.For example, according to the U.K. Charity commission, 43% of charities in the U.K. had an income of less than £10,000 ($16,000), contributing only 0.4% of the total charity sector revenue. By contrast 1.1% of charities had an income in excess of £5 million, contributing two-thirds of the income.For these small charities the Internet has so far not proved to be the gold mine that some hoped. A report by analysts nfpSynergy found that online donations in 2011 comprised a modest 3.7% of income, barely half the money raised from institutional investors (7%). Part of the issue is that the most generous demographic, the over-65s, account for 35% of all donations but are the least likely to be online. Research by U.K. think-tank Policy Exchange showed seven out of 10 of them don't have an online device at home, 5.4 million have never used the Internet, and only one in 20 owns a smartphone.However, reaching the remaining 65% of givers through the Internet is also a problem. One of the limiting factors, the report concluded, is lack of skills. Charities and campaign groups simply lack the talent either to exploit technology to raise funds or to drive innovation.But even if companies can't invest in huge data analytic programs, according to nfpSynergy Managing Director Michelle Madden, social media represents a huge opportunity for charities to engage with their supporters and doesn't require advanced technological skills.While many social media commentators have scorned the idea of individuals signing up to Facebook protest pages as simply a way to assuage guilt, an action disparaged as "slactivism", U.S. research has found that for those who "liked" a Facebook page, it marked just the beginning. of their engagement.The November 2011 report from Georgetown University found those who "liked" a page were more than twice as likely to take part in offline events than nonsocial media cause promoters and were five times more likely to recruit others to sign a petition for a cause; four times more likely to ask others to contact their political representatives; and three times more likely to request others to donate.But amid all the hoopla ofbig dataand social media, some older, simpler technologies have proved to be incredibly successful. Within 48 hours of the 2010 Haiti earthquake devastating the country, nearly $5 million in aid had been raised in the U.S. via text messages. Within 10 days that had grown to more than $30 million. And according to a Pew Study, 78% of the donors had never given money before.Write to Ben Rooney atCredit: By Ben Rooney