Cassidy Turley, the new commercial real-estate firm that launched in 2010, is making a push to take a bigger share of the relatively new niche business of providing services to tenants and owners of data centers.In the old days, brokers would simply help companies find office, store or warehouse space. Now companies big and small also need places to put backup data facilities and servers for their websites, with some facilities as big as buildings and others as small as closets.To help companies meet these needs, Cassidy Turley has hired Thomas Traugott, whose background includes working as a private consultant and at data-center company CoreSite. Mr. Traugott says he's going to focus on helping owners of buildings and co-location companies--which rent out space wholesale from landlords, build data centers and then lease out space to end-users--find tenants as well as advising developers on building new data centers. Many data centers in the New York region are in New Jersey. CBRE estimates that since 2005, 24 buildings have been developed in New Jersey with 4.9 million square feet of space devoted to data."When the real estate is as little as 5% of the data center budget, knowing the other elements--construction, operations, energy costs, incentives--are what become material,'' Mr. Traugott says.But it isn't going to be easy for Mr. Traugott. Cassidy Turley faces tough competition from top brokerage firms that have developedbig data-center practices. For example, CBRE Group Inc. has a staff of 50 working on data-center leasing and sales transactions. About a quarter of that staff works full time for what CBRE calls its "Critical Environments" division.Cushman andamp; Wakefield has about 25 brokers nationwide working on data center deals. Jones Lang La Salle has 30 project managers, 26 brokers and 15 engineering and operations staff in its Data Center Solutions Group.Mr. Traugott says Cassidy Turley hopes to differentiate itself by providing research to clients, in what he describes as an "opaque'' market. "We will be providing more reports, market research to our clients that really doesn't exist,'' Mr. Traugott says. "We think we can build a better mousetrap, if you will."Cassidy Turley and other real estate companies say the data business has enormous growth potential. About 75% of the leasing transactions that occur today don't involve a broker, according to Pat Lynch, managing director with CBRE's Critical Environments business.Brokers say companies are increasingly recognizing the importance of hiring professionals to negotiate their deals. Otherwise there's a danger of tenants not getting the best possible terms, or even worse, running into problems with the center that hurt could their businesses, brokers warn."There are lots of horror stories," Mr. Lynch says.Susannah Moran