Why CIOs MustRethink NetworkInfrastructureCloud computing, mobile devices andBig Dataare generating more data than today's corporate networks can handle, forcing chief information officers to rethink how their infrastructure is built, according to a new survey from Forrester Research.To manage such challenges, the research firm said CIOs need to re-architect infrastructure to be more simple, agile and programmable, with the ability to scale up rapidly.Traditional network infrastructure was "hand crafted and molded" for static computing needs, not for the various devices, operating systems, applications or users now connecting to corporate networks, said Forrester analyst Andre Kindness during a customer Web conference.And traditional networks also didn't factor in technology introduced by users. In the survey of 150 CIOs and other IT decision makers in August and September, 64% said cloud applications such as Skype, Gmail and Dropbox accessed by employees on the corporate network clogged up their IT services.The increased use of data-intensive applications for predictive analytics and business intelligence also weighs on those networks. At a time when companies must react quickly to competitive threats -- think Wal-Mart Stores Inc. adopting same-day delivery to compete with Amazon.com Inc. -- businesses need to lean on their infrastructure to support strategic actions, he said."Our design principles are really out of sync for where we need to go," Mr. Kindness said. "CIOs will have to fundamentally rethink how networks are architected."BMC Software CIO Mark Settle said a handful of strategic acquisitions BMC made for long-term business growth means he has to support sudden increases in the infrastructure requirements of the new employees and contractors around the world."Every acquisition . . . makes our network more complex so the challenge of delivering services to both the contractors and the new employees over that network remains a prime concern for us," Mr. Settle said.One modern network approach gaining traction is software-defined networking, in which data is facilitated across a network of low-cost routers and switches and managed by one central application running on low-cost servers.Backers of this approach, including Juniper Networks Inc. and rival Cisco Systems Inc., said the software makes networks cheaper to build and more efficient to operate.Regardless of what equipment CIOs use to craft their new networks, Forrester's Mr. Kindness said they should be able to click a button to provision networking resources, or better yet, have fully automated systems.For example, a CIO could program a network to set user-access policies that govern what happens when a new user logs on to the network, rather than ordering an IT engineer to grant the user access.If automated and configured properly, networks could interweave services to deliver information to the right person at the right time, he said. And this should all happen securely, without compromising sensitive data on the network."We're going to be supporting billions of options out there, and we have to move away from these old concepts that are going to keep us from being competitive," Mr. Kindness said. "The business is going to be dependent on the IT infrastructure."-- Clint Boulton---CIO Journal is a Wall Street Journal news service for business-technology executives. For more, please visit blogs.wsj.com/cioSubscribe to WSJ: