Some stores send expectant mothers gift packages containing a few diapers, some bibs, and formula samples. So how did they know the women were pregnant?The stores harnessed the power of "big data"--predicting significant life events by tracking the women's purchases on store-issued credit cards.Butbig dataisn't just for retailers. For financial advisers,big dataholds the promise of sharper client outreach and better resource management, say industry experts.Traditionally, advisers have had to cozy up close to know if a customer was coming into money or getting ready to leave the firm. But that's only practical if you have a small client base."Most advisers only keep close tabs on their biggest clients," says Matthew Wein of Qualified Media, a publisher of financial-adviser databases. "Big datagives them insights on their other clients' 'life events'--marriages, babies or divorces--they wouldn't otherwise have, unless it was long after the event."Spotting a life event before its too late is an opportunity for an adviser to take action--make a phone call, send a card or a gift basket--with a view to cementing the relationship and maybe turning a small client into a big one.Ethan Eden runs Market76, a company that helps independent advisers track their clients. But until recently he helped run Diastole Wealth Management, a registered investment adviser in Guilford, Conn., with around $500 million under management. Besides sales and client management, he likesbig datafor its power to improve small-advisory operations.At Diastole, Mr. Eden culled internal data to test clients' relative profitability. "We wanted to know if the $10 million client we'd be spending a lot of time on with meetings and phone calls was as profitable as the $3 million client we hardly heard from," he says. "A principal adviser's time is one of the valuable assets a firm has, and we wanted to know if we were making the best use of it."Mr. Eden also used data from the firm's financial records to show colleagues that some kinds of business--such as 401(k)s--may boost assets under management, but take up more time and invite more regulatory scrutiny than others."It's one thing to make an argument, just tell a young adviser something like this," he says. "Being able to show them is more powerful."Gartner Inc. says the hunt for business-relevant information tucked away in databases and social-media sites will drive $28 billion in information-technology spending this year and $34 billion in 2013. But the consulting firm also predicts the term "big data" will be obsolete by 2020.That may be a good thing. There's already a lot of confusion around the term."It really means data you can't handle with a normal mainframe," says Mr. Wein. "It's like Carl Sagan used to say: 'billions and billions'--of whatever--stars, price points."Big datais a sketchy term, but it stands for something advisory firms can't afford to ignore, says Alex Pigliucci, head of Accenture's wealth- and asset-management business. With capital markets subdued, it will be a vital point of differentiation for firms that want in on the $30 trillion or so that baby boomers will be passing to heirs in the next few decades.And thebig datapoint here is that these heirs--Generation X and millennials--are likely to be heavy and habitual users of social media and other technology-based tools that are prime targets forbig-datamining.In fact, large banks and brokerages are spending a lot onbig datain hopes of putting smaller firms, which have been winning market share from them, back in the shade.But small firms don't have to be idle, says Mr. Wein. First, they should be aware of the concept and on watch forbig-dataapplications that make sense for them. Second, they can do small things like cull through clients' LinkedIn profiles for word of promotions and new jobs they can respond to.Mr. Eden agrees that even stop-gap efforts to make headway withbig datacan pay off. "It's like everything else, you make the most gain from your first steps," he says.Credit: By Thomas Coyle