MAKING an exception only for ice, snow or bridge closures, Alexandros E. Washburn, the urbane architect who directs the urban design division of the New York City Department of City Planning, commutes to work across the Brooklyn Bridge weekday mornings on a contraption he refers to as his Humvee.Regrettably, it is not amphibious.Like other males of his genre, Mr. Washburn, 50, is resolutely black-clad and bears the requisite smudge of facial stubble. He is a green and sustainable kind of architect (the rebuilt roof on his 1890s Red Hook row house is planted with grasses and herbs, and he waters his blueberries with recycled rainwater). The built city and nature, he says, have historically been at odds, but in his master plan they should "overlap."He says he is more interested in concocting public spaces than constructing impressive buildings (though he has done his share of that). And it is reassuring that his version of a Humvee is actually a bicycle designed to carry three, since the two youngest of his four children, ages 4 and 2, occasionally come along for the ride. Their helmets are neon-hued; his headgear is, of course, noirish."Urban designers have got to wear all black," he joked. "It's a custom you never challenge."Mr. Washburn has an alternate bike, a fold-up model that he takes on business trips to Washington, another city he prefers to navigate on two wheels.The primary responsibility of Mr. Washburn's group -- a cadre of specialists who supply the Department of City Planning with pictorial renderings of the way proposed developments will enhance, or diminish, pre-existing neighborhoods -- is making the civic cityscape, streets included, a more palatable place, with space for pedestrians to ambulate, explore and, when the site is right, linger."Urban design is about transformation," he said. "You control nothing, but hopefully you influence everything." When Mr. Washburn wants to be in control, he repairs to his painting studio in Red Hook, where he works in oils.Flooded byways are his nemesis, so the atrocities and aggravations of Hurricane Sandy's aftermath -- he had to evacuate his family to the South Slope in Brooklyn -- have already had an impact on the projects and problems waiting to be solved on his drafting table."It is strange to work professionally on something as personal as the safety of your home and neighborhood," he said. His group had already been busy with what he called "flood adaptation issues," using computer models andbig data, he said, "but nothing prepares you for the day after.""My role in the recovery is to push forward with the city's adaptation plan," he continued. "Maybe my experience will help get the balance right, right now."Next up is a realignment of Vanderbilt Avenue and the pedestrian corridors beneath it, leading into and out of Grand Central Terminal. The idea behind the Vanderbilt Avenue project is, Mr. Washburn said, to "create a new gateway to Midtown." The complication? "Vanderbilt is not on terra firma," he said. "So Vanderbilt leaks. Every walking surface is below or above infrastructure, train sheds, subways, underground passageways. It's an age-old problem, and the new public space offers us the opportunity to fix it."A number of city projects now pushing forward have, at some stage, been a series of enlightened doodles in his sketchbook. They include the reconfigured Coney Island plaza; rezoned West Chelsea with its High Line park; the planned interior improvements at Moynihan Station, across from Pennsylvania Station; and the brainstorming behind Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's much publicized micro-unit housing prototype. "We put a thesis worth of housing law into that tiny space," he said. Recently, Mr. Washburn's two-wheeled ride, the brawniest in the bicycle lineup, was parked on the ground floor of 22 Reade Street. The building is headquarters for the Department of City Planning and its commissioner, Amanda Burden. The driving force behind the design squad, Ms. Burden decided in 2007 that the city had gone for too long -- since the 1970s -- without the contributions of an urban design division. She felt new public projects and their attendant zoning changes could be best approached if drawn in three-dimensional scale from the perspective of a pedestrian navigating the city.So she enticed Mr. Washburn away from W Architecture, his six-year collaboration with Barbara Wilks, whom he met when both shared studio space in Williamsburg. There, he said, "we used to sneak past the chain-link fence and the warehouses to get down to the East River and marvel at the views of Manhattan. It's kind of ironic that we wound up designing what was probably the first public park in Williamsburg." He was referring to the public plazas adjacent to the Edge.Ms. Burden said the urban designers are making a difference in the way residents interact with the monolith they inhabit."Alex and his team have integrated design into city-making," she said. "On the streets, design detail means everything. The team studies what makes great places: the width of the sidewalk, the spacing of street trees, the diversity of retail -- and they integrate these details into our plans, turning projects into places that people want to be."Mr. Washburn, who worked for Hartman-Cox Architects in Washington, his hometown, after receiving a graduate degree from Harvard, has previous government experience. He left Hartman-Cox to become Senator Daniel P. Moynihan's public works adviser and, later, the president of the Pennsylvania Station Redevelopment Corporation, a post accompanied by a perk: office space on the 62nd floor of his favorite skyscraper, the Chrysler Building. "It has noble bones," he explained."When I was working as an architect in D.C.," he said, "the city was falling apart around me, and I came to the conclusion that architecture alone as a tool for building great cities just wasn't working anymore. Someone told me the only person in government who cared about architecture was Daniel Patrick Moynihan, so I took an unpaid internship working for him, sitting in the backroom writing memos."The senator liked his memos, found out he had a certified architect on board, and hired him as an adviser."He was the person who gave me the sense that nothing great is going to happen in a city unless you can get politics, design and finance to line up together," Mr. Washburn recalled.In 2000, with more than $860 million earmarked for the Pennsylvania Station project, he left public service to start his own firm "and do something different": like build DoMa Gallery, a glass house that displays a private art collection inside a historic Baltimore barn, and turn a parking lot near West 125th Street into a waterfront park with the first public piers built in the city in 40 years.After riding home, where Mr. Washburn likes to be is high and dry on his Red Hook rooftop, martini in hand, watching the sun set on Manhattan. The views, he said, are terrific. But there are always improvements to ponder.Drawing Board: Alexandros Washburn Is the Urban Design Director for the New York City Department of City Planning. Some City Projects Got Their Start As Doodles in His Sketchbook. (Photographs by Elizabeth D. Herman for the New York Times)