BIG DATA: OPPORTUNITIES AND RISKS CO-CHAIRSTim ArmstrongChairman and CEO,AOL Inc.Dominic BartonGlobal Managing Director,McKinsey andamp; Co.R. Marcelo ClaureChairman, President and CEO,Brightstar Corp.Subject ExpertDavid J. RothkopfPresident and CEO,Garten RothkopfCompanies around the world increasingly collect and process vast amounts of customer data, particularly data tracking consumer behavior on the Web.It's a phenomenon commonly referred to asBig Data, and it has generated widespread debate over a host of issues. What should companies do with such data? How can it be used profitably? How should it be treated? Should there be laws governing its use? Internationally recognized safeguards for consumer privacy? And how do U.S. companies stay competitive as more countries learn how to process and interpret such data?The Wall Street Journal's John Bussey moderated a task-force discussion about just such issues. Here are edited excerpts of their presentations to the CEO Council:JOHN BUSSEY: Our group ended up with essentially two principles and two action items. Dominic, if you could take our first, please?DOMINIC BARTON: Our group felt very strongly that this is a huge opportunity, and we shouldn't focus on how to protect or regulateBig Databefore we recognize how important it is. Companies that useBig Dataeffectively get about a 6% productivity improvement versus others.We're at the early stages. It's in every sector. And we all felt it can be the next wave of productivity growth if we use this data effectively.Depending on how you protect or use data, it can actually lead to a country's competitive advantage. We've got small city-states like Singapore and Abu Dhabi that are allowing, for example, consumer medical information to be publicly available to get innovation.So let's not lose sight of how important it can be for productivity improvement as we think about the protection.MR. BUSSEY: Marcelo, our second principle.MARCELO CLAURE: First of all, we had a fascinating group. We had a tremendous amount of interaction. And we quickly realized that all of us live in a hyper-connected world. By that I mean we're passing a huge amount of data every day through a connected car, a connected cellphone, a connected tablet, a connected home.We see it as a tremendous opportunity, but what is the government role?Some members of our group argued that government shouldn't be allowed to regulate or do anything related toBig Data. But the rest of the group agreed that we've got to define the basics of what the government is going to do.And where we came out at the end was, government should have the role of defining what is legal and what is illegal in the use ofBig Data. And that's where the government should stop. We think it should be left up to the consumer to define what he or she wants to share and doesn't want to share, what is public and what is private.Limiting government control to what's legal and illegal will allow the consumer to make more choices. As a consumer, you should be able to determine how much of your Facebook profile you want to share, or whether you want to share information about where you shopped last.MR. BUSSEY: And Tim has our two action items.TIM ARMSTRONG: The first one is probably more important than it seems on the surface, especially for private companies. I think we started this as kind of a government conversation, but mostly it's private companies that actually own the infrastructure that makes the company or the country work.So cybersecurity is something that really needs to be dealt with. And specifically, having standards around this is important in two different directions.One is standards of what happens when something gets attacked. How do you report it, and what is the infrastructure to help companies with that?The second piece which is important and which came up in our discussion is when your data lives outside the country, or when you're going to do things with data in other countries. There are groups like CFIUS [the U.S. government's Committee on Foreign Investment in the U.S., which reviews foreign investment deemed to have an effect on national security] which are inside the government, which, if you haven't dealt with them, you will, over these type of data assets. Cybersecurity is really important.The last action item is coming up with a global data treaty. The U.S. is probably the largest economy involved inBig Dataright now, and we think it's important for the U.S. to take a leading role in defining what some of theBig Datapolicies and standards should be in such a treaty. We would hope that we, the U.S., could define a basic treaty to start off, and then other countries could either adopt or augment the treaty over time.---Big Data: The Top Four Recommendations1.Big DataIs OpportunityIndustry already recognizes that the advent ofBig Datais a potential engine of significant economic growth. Policy makers must address issues such as security and privacy but not restrict this opportunity. Consumers, government and companies all have a role to play in defining policy. Countries need to recognize that the treatment of data is ultimately an issue of national competitiveness.2. Create Rules of the RoadThe government should define which activities concerning data are legal or illegal. For activities that are legal, consumers should then define what is public or private in their own cases through opting in or out in terms of what they choose to reveal about themselves.3. Enact Cybersecurity StandardsThe private sector, government, the military and consumers should jointly develop detailed standards and incidence-reporting practices for cybersecurity, building on existing industry best practices.4. Create a Global Data TreatyThe U.S. should play a leadership role in coordinating with international bodies to pass a treaty to establish clear, universal standards on data privacy and ownership.Subscribe to WSJ:Credit: By John Bussey