In General Electric Co.'s vision of the future, the company will be able to fix or replace its products before they break.In that world, airlines will receive notices from GE many miles before a jet-engine part is likely to fail, railroads will be able to avoid derailments, appliance-repair people will be able to diagnose problems remotely, and hospitals administrators will be better able to allocate sparse resources to patients.That future hinges on the ability of those devices to send status updates from sophisticated sensors over a network that connects people to machines and machines to one another, in much the same way people are connected over the Web.While this technology's potential has been discussed for years, there are signs it is gaining traction. GE hopes to be an agent of this change--and a beneficiary of it as well by building the technology into its products and hoping its customers buy it.The Internet of Things, or the industrial Internet, as GE calls it, has the potential to add between $10 trillion and $15 trillion to global gross domestic product by 2030, says a report issued by the company Monday.The report says a 1% increase in efficiency generated thanks to the network could mean savings of $30 billion in aviation, $66 billion in power generation and $63 billion in health care over 15 years.While self-serving, such research shows that a much- and long-hyped technology is finally maturing, and that some people have finally figured out what to do with the masses of data thatBig Dataand the Internet of Things are making available.But customers should also bear in mind that GE is trying to promote this vision of an industrial Internet at a time when cybersecurity of industrial control systems is under threat, particularly in the utility sector into which GE is selling heavily.Those issues aren't cooling GE's ardor. "The ability in our world to go man to machine, the ability to marry real-time customer data with real-time performance data of our products--to me that's the holy grail in our business," GE Chief Executive Jeffrey Immelt said at Salesforce.com's Dreamforce conference in September.Over time, those status updates will make it possible for GE to learn more about how its jet engines perform and to be able to improve the efficiency of those products. "If we can save, just in the GE-installed base, 1% on fuel burn, that's worth $2 billion in profit at airlines around the world," said Mr. Immelt.These kinds of results aren't limited to aviation. For example, about 1,000 GE Appliance field technicians care for 130 million appliances in homes and businesses across the U.S. In June, GE introduced a home-service repair program that lets technicians connect laptops loaded with analytics software to a new generation of appliances with Ethernet ports.That service makes it easier for technicians to more quickly and accurately diagnose problems. In the future, the cloud-based analytics software will collect information about the appliances, including temperature and events that wear down the machine. The software would anticipate possible problems and inform GE when parts need to be replaced. That means technicians show up at customer homes with the correct part in hand, eliminating additional service trips.Already, sensors on trains are transmitting information back to rail companies, and real-time diagnostics and predictive analytics software are preventing machine breakdowns before they happen. Union Pacific Corp., the nation's largest railroad company, can now predict certain kinds of derailments days or weeks before they are likely to occur. Its software analyzes data from acoustic and visual sensors on the underside of each rail car.While those sensors have been in place for a decade, they have only been able to help technicians spot imminent problems with tracks and wheels. Now, with predictive analytics, the company can spot dangerous conditions well in advance of a problem, Union Pacific Chief Information Officer Lynden Tennison told CIO Journal in March. Major derailments can result in $20 million to $40 million in damages and significant delays.GE Transportation estimates that 2.5% of rail operations costs--about $5.6 billion per year globally--are the result of system inefficiencies, whether it's a derailment or waste in fleet scheduling.GE is busily selling data services of this kind to its industrial customers. Vince Campisi, CIO of GE's Intelligent Platforms division, told CIO Journal, "We have a heritage and domain history to make us able to more effectively leverage that [industrial Internet] technology, and now that comes in packages that customers can buy and leverage for their own companies."GE says hospitals, for example, can better track equipment and manage patient beds with software GE sells. That software can pick up the location of thousands of pieces of critical equipment in a hospital through sensor signals on machines. Much of that gear is mobile and such software saves nurses from running room to room searching for it.GE's report estimates it could translate into an added hour of productivity for health-care workers on each shift. Better utilization and tracking of equipment can also translate into a 15% to 30% reduction in hospital equipment costs.The report also devotes considerable attention to how the industrial Internet will affect energy companies. Yet, the report fails to discuss at any great length the security implications of creating a network linking all these machines.The biggest threat probably isn't that machines will rise up against humanity in the manner of the Terminator's Skynet. Rather, it's that connecting these systems using standard communication technologies, such as the Internet Protocol, make it more likely that they can be attacked successfully. Chevron, Saudi Aramco, Rasgas and other companies have been hit by cyberattacks in recent years, but have been able to largely contain any damages and to keep them from affecting their production networks.Still, the possibility of creating efficiencies and saving money will be enticing to many executives. Last year Air Canada signed an agreement with GE Aviation to use its myEngines digital app suite that helps companies manage their engine fleets and improve productivity.Air Canada operates a fleet of GE engines in its aircraft. In 2011, commercial-jet airplanes from Air Canada and other airlines were in the air for about 50 million hours, translating into a $60 billion annual maintenance bill. Engine maintenance alone costs $25 billion of that sum.With an industrial Internet tracking engine parts and communicating back to the engine manufacturer, GE figures that airlines will reduce commercial-jet-engine maintenance costs by $250 million for every 1% improvement in engine-maintenance efficiency.That's a vision of the future that CIOs can buy into today--or a flavor of Kool-Aid they can willingly drink--depending on your perspective.Rachael King