CORRECTION APPENDEDSAN FRANCISCO - After years of being wallflowers at Silicon Valley's hottest tech conferences and Sean Parker's after-parties, enterprise technology firms are now part of the "in" crowd.The flameouts of social media stocks over the last year have left venture capital firms searching for a more measured approach to investing."Watching capital markets do what they just did - to Facebook, to Groupon, to Zynga - not a lot of people want to get over their skis," said Hans Swildens, the managing director of Industry Ventures, who said he had not invested in consumer tech since 2010. "They want a nice ride down the hill."That means technology sectors - including mobile security, data analytics and storage companies and mobile payment systems - which previously elicited a shrug or a snooze, are suddenly finding millions of dollars of investments coming at them. Here's a look at some of the more promising sectors.SEALING THE LEAKS Increasingly, employees are taking sensitive corporate data home with them, frustrated with the limits of corporate technology and using their personal phones and tablets to work. That has created huge security and compliance headaches for chief information officers struggling to regain control over corporate data.Enter the mobile security industry. Venture firms like Sequoia Capital, Greylock Partners, Andreessen Horowitz and Accel Partners are backing companies that wrap extra security around employees' personal iPhones and Android devices.Lookout, a start-up, has already been valued at $1 billion. Its software offers spyware and malware protection, helps locate lost or stolen phones and alerts users when their phones have connected to unencrypted Wi-Fi networks.Okta, a start-up that helps employees at companies like LinkedIn and Pandora securely connect to their work applications from their personal devices, recently raised $25 million in fresh financing from Sequoia Capital.The mobile security sector is also attracting merger deals. ZenPrise, a mobile security start-up, was acquired last week by Citrix, a maker of virtualization software. Investors expect similar acquisitions to follow.STORING THE BYTES New storage methods will be critical to harnessing the gigabytes of data now pouring in from those mobile devices, as well as the Web, social networks and video. To accommodate the fire hose of information, companies have started revamping their data centers. Increasingly, they are moving away from expensive disk drives and slow backup solutions to the cheaper, high-speed flash memory used in iPhones and digital cameras."For 30 years, companies stored everything on spinning disks. Now they're moving to a flash memory-based model," said Joseph Ansanelli, a partner at Greylock Partners.Investors are taking note. Fusion-io, a high-capacity flash memory company, had a successful public offering last year, then increased revenue by 82 percent, to $359 million, in its latest fiscal year. Its technology packs in storage capacity and speeds up database performance - a compelling proposition for Facebook, its largest customer, which now stores 2.7 billion "Likes" and 300 million photos a day, or roughly 105 terabytes of data each half-hour.Producers of high-speed flash memory storage products, like Pure Storage and Nimble Storage, are now attracting millions in venture backing. Pure Storage emerged from stealth mode only a year ago and now serves a wide range of businesses, including Sierra Nevada Brewing and the city of Davenport, Iowa. In August, it raised $40 million, bringing its total funding to $95 million. A month later, Nimble Storage doubled its funding with $40 million in new capital from Sequoia, Accel and others.CRUNCHING MOUNTAINS OF DATA Some of the hottest innovations are in large-scale data mining. With the right analytical tools,big datacan be used to solve complex problems quickly."Companies now need to be able to do large-scale data mining and analysis in real time, as opposed to one guy in the I.T. department running a pricing analysis over the weekend," said Rich Wong, a partner at Accel Partners.Corporate demand for such high-powered analysis helped make Splunk, a data analytics company, one of 2012's top-performing I.P.O.'s.Investors searching for the next Splunk are now watching several start-ups. One front-runner is Cloudera, founded by alumni of Yahoo, Google, Oracle and Facebook. The firm incorporates Hadoop, an open-source software, to make complex data queries that help drug firms predict adverse drug side effects, or media companies target readers with relevant content.DIGITAL WALLET It may not be the end of paper money just yet, but more and more commercial products are making mobile payments a huge business. In hindsight, eBay's $1.5 billion acquisition 10 years ago of PayPal, the mobile payments company, was a bargain; PayPal is expected to generate $10 billion in payment volume this year. Square, the four-year-old mobile payments start-up run by a Twitter co-founder, Jack Dorsey, has caught up. In November, it said that it, too, was now processing $10 billion in payments a year.Both are also vying for attention with Google and Intuit, which offer mobile payment services, and, more recently, with big retail chains like Best Buy and Walmart, which said in August that it were working on ways for customers to pay with smartphones.Even with brutal competition, venture capitalists are still eagerly throwing money at a new crop of start-ups like Braintree, which helps e-commerce sites process credit card payments, and Stripe, which offers a similar service for software developers.In the last two years, Braintree has raised nearly $70 million. And, this year, Stripe raised $40 million from venture firms and angels, including some of the PayPal founders, Peter Thiel, Elon Musk and Max Levchin.Smaller start-ups may have a harder time taking on PayPal and Square as those services become more ubiquitous. They will also have to compete on the security front, where even one hacker breach can lead to a lack of confidence among customers.MOBILE CONCIERGE Apps, with the proverbial "touch of a button," have converted phones into urban remote controls, allowing customers to order meals, errands, car rides, concert tickets and even cocktails.The darling of the space is Uber, an app that lets users order a car service with the touch of a screen. The three-year-old start-up has already raised $50 million from the likes of Goldman Sachs and Jeff Bezos, Amazon's chief.Though Uber has run into battles with municipal transportation authorities, other firms, including Cabulous, Taxi Magic and Hailo, are jumping into the space.Similarly, GrubHub's app offers mobile convenience for food delivery. Hotel Tonight's app does the same for same-day hotel bookings. Every day at noon, spontaneous or stranded travelers can find heavily discounted rates for hotel rooms that night. The two-year-old mobile app has already raised more than $35 million in financing.A younger start-up, WillCall, lets users buy concert and theater tickets. And Coaster even lets users order, pay and tip for cocktails at bars with their smartphones. Those two apps are only in San Francisco, but venture capitalists are optimistic that on-demand mobile services are no fad."Soon there will be a remote control for your life," said Peter Fenton, a venture partner at Benchmark Capital. "The future has arrived."This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.Correction:  December 19, 2012, WednesdayThis article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An article last Wednesday about technology sectors that are attracting new investment money described incorrectly the business of two start-up firms, Pure Storage and Nimble Storage. They sell a high-speed flash memory storage product; they do not provide off-site Web storage.Not Social Media: Jeff Hammerbacher Is a Founder of Cloudera, Which Does Large-Scale Data Mining. Enterprise Technology Firms Are Drawing Interest, Like Hotel Tonight, Below, Which Finds Last-Minute Hotel Rooms in San Francisco. (Photograph by Tedx Silicon Valley)