Utility MullsBig DataAnd Security of the GridAs utilities attempt to harness the power ofBig Datato integrate information about supply and demand, the biggest obstacle remains ensuring the security of the grid, said Mark Goff, a systems engineer with Tennessee Valley Authority.The power utility, which services nine million customers, could improve energy efficiency and better predict transformer blowouts by pooling data from the grid with maintenance information and weather data.But Mr. Goff says he is two years from putting such a system in place because the convergence of data creates a potential opening for hackers. "Security is without a doubt the biggest obstacle," Mr. Goff said. "If somehow you got into [the industrial system], you could turn off protection systems and shut the grid down."A single analytical platform could create a gateway between the more secure data systems that control power distribution and less secure corporate networks, Mr. Goff said.The data that utilities need to analyze often resides on the production network, while maintenance records and weather data are on the corporate network. To safely merge data from the two networks onto a single system, Mr. Goff says the platform would have to ensure a one-way flow of data, so that it could be used to analyze information on the production network without serving as a bridge to the corporate network."Anytime there are systems feeding in, there's a chance that someone can find a way to get into the network," Mr. Goff said.The potential intrusion through a corporate network is a growing concern as more utilities consider putting smart meters in customer homes. The devices transmit data about customer usage habits, which the utility can use to more efficiently deliver power and set prices.But that data is usually delivered through the corporate network, and transmitting it into an analytical processor could potentially give hackers access to systems that control the power grid, said Brett Sargent, technology chief of LumaSense Technologies Inc., which builds machine sensors used by the Tennessee Valley Authority."The moreBig Datastreams that are coming back, the more opportunities there are for a hacker to get in," he said.-- Joel SchectmanDebt Collector TapsPredictive AnalyticsThe increase in consumer debt is forcing debt collector Encore Capital Group to re-evaluate collection methods and applyBig Datato better understand consumer financial distress.The company, which buys and then collects consumer debt, is investing in predictive analytics software to help it lower its debt collection costs and gain a better understanding of which consumers are most likely to repay their debts, said the company's chief information officer, Carl Eberling.Encore is using software from SAS Institute Inc. to build models around what drives people to take on more debt than they can afford. Ideally, this will help Encore be more knowledgeable and sensitive in working with consumers to reconcile their debts, Mr. Eberling said.To support this work, Mr. Eberling said he is considering using cloud analytics from startup DataStax Inc., whose commercial version of the open-source Apache Cassandra database is designed to process large amounts of data in real-time.The changes come amid growth for Encore, as smaller debt collectors, unable to meet rules set by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, have sold their portfolios to Encore.People are also paying back consumer debt faster. Defaults and delinquencies on consumer debt dropped from a peak of 10% to 12% during the 2008 recession to 2% to 3% today, said Larry Berlin, a financial analyst with First Analysis Securities Corp.Encore collected $246 million in consumer debt in its third quarter, up 30% from a year ago.-- Clint Boulton---CIO Journal is a Wall Street Journal news service for business-technology executives. For more, please visit blogs.wsj.com/cioSubscribe to WSJ: