Change Maryland is hosting the "Business Summit Breakfast on Improving Maryland's Economic Competitiveness" on Thursday.Panelists are to include Anirban Basu of Sage Policy Group, former Maryland Economic Development Secretary Aris Melissaratos, Del. Steven R. Schuh (R-Anne Arundel), Marta Mossburg of the Baltimore Sun, Sen. Allan H. Kittleman (R-Howard) and Christopher Summers of the Maryland Public Policy Institute.Larry Hogan, chairman of Change Maryland and president and chief executive of the Hogan Cos., will serve as moderator. Hogan served as a member of former Republican governor Robert L. Ehrlich Jr.'s cabinet.The event begins at 8 a.m. at the Westin Annapolis, 100 Westgate Cir., Annapolis. $100.Other events of noteTuesday, Feb. 19The Greater Washington Board of Trade is hosting a discussion on "How To Use Advanced Analytics To Improve Your Competitive Advantage." Bill Franks, chief analytics officer at Teradata and author of "Taming theBig DataTidal Wave: Finding Opportunities in Huge Data Streams with Advanced Analytics," is to give the keynote. A panel discussion with Jon Cohen, general manager and polling director at Capital Insight/The Washington Post, and Larry Lerner, managing director at Accenture Analytics, is to follow. The event begins at 8 a.m. at the St. Regis Hotel's Astor Ballroom, 923 16th St. NW. $75 for members, $95 for everyone else.The Northern Virginia Black Chamber of Commerce is hosting an after-hours business mixer beginning at 6 p.m. at the Waterford, 6715 Commerce St., Springfield. Free for members, $20 for everyone else.Thursday, Feb. 21The Women Business Owners of Montgomery County is holding a lunch networking event at 11:30 a.m. at Cesco Osteria, 7401 Woodmont Ave., Bethesda. $25 for members, $35 for everyone else.The Community Business Partnership is holding a seminar on how to become a government contractor. The event begins at 1 p.m. at the CBP's offices at 7001 Loisdale Rd., Suite C, Springfield. $65.The Northern Virginia Technology Council is holding a panel discussion on "Practical Financing Advice for Early-Stage Entrepreneurs. Panelists are to include John Burke, founder of True Ventures; Eric Koefoot, managing partner of PublicRelay; Sean Mallon, senior investment director for CIT GAP Funds; and S. Tien Wong, chief executive of Lore Systems. Michael Labriola, senior associate at Wilson Sonsini Goodrich andamp; Rosati, is to moderate. The event begins at 4:30 p.m. at the Virginia Tech Research Center - Arlington, Second Floor, 900 N. Glebe Rd., Arlington. $25 for members, $45 for everyone else.Friday, Feb. 22Consultant Mark Amtower of Amtower andamp; Co. is to lead "A Hands-On Strategic Workshop for Improving Your Personal and Professional Network," hosted by the Northern Virginia Technology Council. The event begins at 7:30 a.m. at Northrop Grumman, 7575 Colshire Dr., McLean. $45 for members, $75 for everyone else.- Shawn Selby