There's a lot of hyperbole in the war against hackers. Art Coviello, the 59-year-old executive chairman of EMC Corp.'s RSA security division, is in a position to size up the real threat.RSA makes the login security systems used by 95 of the Fortune 100 companies. Two years ago, it was also the victim of a major cyberattack that put the company's reputation at risk and prompted a $66.3 million charge in part to pay to replace its well-known SecurID tokens.Mr. Coviello, who joined RSA in 1995, doesn't believe in unduly scaring people. Nor does he think the U.S. is at risk of a "cyber-Pearl Harbor," despite a warning to that effect by Defense Secretary Leon Panetta.But he does think disruptive attacks are possible, and the situation for most companies is getting worse.As record crowds of more than 21,000 gather this week in San Francisco for RSA's annual security industry conference, Mr. Coviello, on Monday shared with The Wall Street Journal what he learned from RSA's own attack and what other CEOs should worry about now. Edited excerpts:WSJ: Are we witnessing a shift toward hackers stealing intellectual property, instead of just personal and credit-card data?Mr. Coviello: Absolutely. Nation states want to get economic advantage out of hacking. I call it 'IP copying' as opposed to 'IP theft.' It takes a while for IP copying--especially if it goes undetected--for the negative result to come to the corporation.WSJ: Are there marketplaces for hackers to sell corporate intellectual property?Mr. Coviello: Criminals used to just do criminal stuff, and nation states just used to do nation-state stuff. Now they are starting to collaborate.If I am a criminal hacker and I have gathered personally identifiable information in the form of credit-card numbers or things I can use to steal somebody's identity, I can monetize that.If I get a technology executive's password, as a criminal I might not know how to monetize that. But malware is so pervasive that they get lots of these credentials. We are now starting to see them sell credentials for executives and technologists in the defense industry to nation states.The flip side is nation states working with hacker groups so they can subcontract some of the work to criminals, to make it harder to be traced.WSJ: What should companies do?Mr. Coviello: Security has always been developed reactively: Find the hole, and plug the hole. It has resulted in a whole bunch of individual isolated controls that don't really give you any form of defense in depth. The controls were also designed to defend a perimeter that, because of the increased use of the Web and mobile devices, has largely dissolved.We need a new model for security. We call it an intelligence-driven model. It is based on risk and new tools that are behavior based and predictive. It is also based on abig-dataapplication so you can spot an attack in progress, so you can do a better job responding to it.WSJ: Do companies need to shift their spending?Mr. Coviello: We are used to spending money on preventing attacks, and we are not spending enough money on detecting and responding to attacks.WSJ: What have you learned about who attacked RSA in March 2011?Mr. Coviello: These attacks are very, very difficult to trace. We have never received direct confirmation as to who attacked us.We actually had two groups attacking us at the same time. The first one was more visible. The second was far more surreptitious.Since that time, we have developed more powerful capabilities to spot hidden patterns--the faint noises that are actually an attack. We just brought those technologies to the market.As a result of our attack--even though many of our customers were inconvenienced--nobody actually suffered a loss of data or a financial loss.WSJ: How did RSA change as an organization?Mr. Coviello: It starts with a better understanding of risk. Who is likely to attack us? What might they want? We thought the attacker would have been interested in our intellectual property. Actually, they were looking for information that would allow them to attack our customers.WSJ: How much did that attack hurt your business?Mr. Coviello: We did not suffer in terms of customer losses, and quite frankly I think we emerged stronger--not that I'd want to go through it again.WSJ: What did you learn about protecting RSA's reputation?Mr. Coviello: Everything to do with our brand is about trust. The single-most powerful thing to protect our brand is to do the right thing and disclose that we had been attacked and that our customers were at risk.We actually over time got credit for the fact that we responded quickly and literally rained down attention on ourselves, so we got the maximum exposure in a bad way, but in a good way for our customers because they were very much informed very quickly.WSJ: What criteria should companies use to decide when to disclose attacks?Mr. Coviello: If an attack on you has the potential to hurt somebody else, then you likely have an obligation to disclose it. If an attack on you might be a source of embarrassment, but nothing is lost then perhaps you don't need to disclose it.You might want to disclose it so that others learn; you might want to share information with law enforcement. I would clearly and strongly recommend that. And for your shareholders, you have a responsibility to disclose if you suffered an economic loss.WSJ: Is security becoming a higher priority for CEOs?Mr. Coviello: CEOs want to focus on selling more and having it cost less. CEOs and their companies are getting tremendous benefit from the Internet. They are more productive, their communication is enhanced. All of these good things don't come free.Write to Geoffrey A. Fowler atCredit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler