Ford Motor Co. wants to read car buyers' minds.A fantasy? Maybe. But by mashing together large databases and analytical algorithms, the Dearborn, Mich.-based auto maker may have achieved the next best thing.About three years ago, Ford began offering a system to dealerships that reads the dealer's inventory, checks national and local supplies of vehicles, interprets buying trends and makes recommendations about what vehicles the dealer should stock -- for example, three Ford Fusions with blue paint and specific types of engines.The result has been significant. Ford vehicles are sitting on lots for fewer weeks, and the prices consumers are paying are rising. The increase in "net pricing," or the price a consumer pays minus a subsidy from the manufacturer, has been a driving force behind Ford's big surge in profitability."Making sure the inventory matches what the customer is looking for is really critical," says John Ginder, manager of system analytics and environmental sciences in Ford's research and advanced engineering division. "The dealer makes a major investment every time he or she orders a vehicle -- there is a long lead time in getting a vehicle, and if the vehicle is ordered in a fashion not popular with customers, it can sit on the lot for months."Car companies have a wealth of data that they are only just beginning to tap to serve customers and reduce costs. Mr. Ginder's group, for instance, has been combing through consumer forums on the Internet and social-media services such as Twitter to spot trends that could help guide product development and problems that might lead to potential warranty issues. The team also mines financial databases to assess the health of key suppliers, and analyzes internal human-resources databases in an effort to identify and head off labor issues, such as engineering resources being stretched too thin.Meanwhile, as more cars are outfitted with always-on Internet connections, car companies will be able to monitor the performance of vehicles on the road and use the data they collect to improve the quality, safety and fuel economy of vehicles and avoid engineering mistakes that could over time erupt into a recall."If you're driving around and you have a problem, and they see a bunch of other people are having the same problem, the car company can send you a message and inform you to get the part changed," says Thilo Koslowski, an analyst at Gartner Inc."Being able to minimize a recall can be real money for manufacturers," he says.Improving safety, however, isn't the only way car companies can use that data. Mr. Koslowski estimates that by 2016, up to a third of all interactions between car companies and their customers will happen in the vehicle. Car companies, for example, could collect and analyze data about how customers use leased vehicles, and based on that information suggest other cars a driver might like around the time his or her lease is expiring, he says."They can notice all the vehicle seat belts are occupied and they can say, hey, maybe you want a family vehicle," Mr. Koslowski says.In the coming years, auto makers like Ford, Audi AG and others see even more potential inbig data. They envision taking information from customers' typical driving patterns, schedules and movements on the road to recommend routes the drivers might feel more comfortable with, either because they prefer city streets to freeways or don't respond well to bumper-to-bumper traffic.Ricky Hudi, head of electrics and electronics development at Audi, says connecting such pieces of information together "opens up many new opportunities for making driving safer, more relaxed and more economical."Networking cars together and gleaning information from their various sensors, for example, could be used to help alert other drivers of icy roads or traffic pileups, or simply help time traffic lights for uninterrupted cruising, he says.Of course, all of this data collection could present privacy dilemmas for auto makers, and it is unclear how they will resolve them.Young people are most likely to accept these new systems at the outset, says Nash Parker, head of Alcatel-Lucent SA's emerging-technology group, which creates prototype cars with auto manufacturers that have advanced wireless communications capabilities."As you get younger, people are more willing to give up privacy for convenience or level of security," he says. But he cautions that regulators could step in and create rules that could slow the rollout of some of these new services.Meanwhile, companies such as Ford are already finding valuable information in their growing mountains of data.And for dealers like Beau Smith, the owner of Sill-TerHar Motors in Broomfield, Colo., that means better profit and sales, thanks to Ford's efforts. "Our turn rate was the best it has ever been," he says.---Mr. Sherr is a Wall Street Journal reporter based in San Francisco. Email him at ian.sherr@wsj.com. Mr. Ramsey is a reporter in Southfield, Mich. Email him at michael.ramsey@wsj.com.Subscribe to WSJ:Credit: By Ian Sherr and Mike Ramsey