Huzzah! Happy days are here again! The Dow Jones industrial average closed Friday at 14,397.07! AAs scores of breathless headlines made clear, that was a record for the index, blasting past its previous all-time high in October 2007. There are plenty of caveats - it's not a record when adjusted for inflation, for example. ABut the biggest reason to discount the importance of the stock market reaching a new high is this: It hasn't been matched by a similar increase in the incomes and job prospects of Americans. The jobless rate is hovering around 8 percent, and the average earnings in the private sector, adjusted for inflation, have barely budged for five years. AThere is often a disconnect between financial markets and the economy as experienced by ordinary American. The reasons this time around are rooted in Washington.BusinessThe nation's largest banks are more prepared to withstand a severe U.S. recession and a global downturn than at any time since the 2008 financial crisis, the Federal Reserve said. The Fed's annual "stress tests" showed that as a group, the 18 banks hold fewer bad loans compared with last year, helped by a stronger economy. The six largest U.S. banks may return almost $41 billion to investors in the next 12 months, the most since 2007, as a result.Time Warner said that it will spin off the magazine unit behind Time, Sports Illustrated and People into a separate, publicly traded company by the end of the year, ending a media marriage that has lasted more than two decades.Exxon Mobil expects production to decline by about 1 percent this year because of weaker output of natural gas, then rise in the next few years as new projects start up. Its production fell 6 percent last year, but the company still earned $44.9 billion, barely missing its 2008 record.Microsoft was fined $733 million by the European Union for breaking a pledge to offer personal computer users a choice of Internet browsers when they install Windows.John Terenzio, a media consultant, sued Al Gore, saying he came up with the idea to sell Current TV to Al-Jazeera and was cut out of the $500 million deal.Pandora Media plans to replace chief executive Joseph Kennedy, and it has started a search to fill the position.IBM chief Ginni Rometty said she sees "big data" services, which let customers mine vast troves of information to make better decisions, as the company's biggest focus this year.Facebook announced a revamp of its news feed, unveiling a minimalist design that focuses on photos, graphics and video.Toyota Motor said that during the current fiscal year, which ends this month, it will turn a profit in its European automotive business for the first time since 2007, a feat that the company expects to repeat in fiscal 2013.Tribune Co. is seeking a single buyer for all of its publications. Tribune, which recently emerged from bankruptcy, owns the Los Angeles Times, the Chicago Tribune, the Baltimore Sun and six other daily papers.Hess is getting out of the gas station business and shedding its energy trading and marketing businesses as it shifts its focus to exploration and production.Boeing said that it will move quickly to get its 787s back in the air if it gets federal approval for a fix for the batteries that have grounded the planes. The FAA is considering a plan that Boeing submitted Feb. 22.Lockheed Martin and Austal received a combined $1.38 billion in orders for continued purchases of the Littoral Combat Ship, according to the Pentagon. The ship is designed to operate in waters close to shore for missions such as clearing mines and delivering humanitarian aid.J.C. Penney said it has laid off about 2,200 employees at 100 of its stores and district offices, the latest move by the struggling store to contain costs as it contends with deep sales declines.Vornado Realty Trust, one of J.C. Penney's biggest shareholders, confirmed that it has sold more than 40 percent of its stake. J.C. Penney's stock lost about two-thirds of its value in 12 months.Macy's, J.C. Penney and Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia were ordered into mediation to resolve a contract dispute concerning a partnership over the Martha Stewart brand. The companies are at trial over whether Macy's has the exclusive rights to sell some Martha Stewart-branded merchandise.DealsDish Network, a satellite TV provider, said it is buying 200 propane-powered vehicles from Roush CleanTech to reduce its fuel costs and carbon emissions.Ikea said Bethesda-based Marriott International will help it open its new budget hotels across Western Europe. They will develop about 50 hotels with 150 to 300 rooms each in major cities.EarningsSmith andamp; Wesson's quarterly profit tripled to $14.6 million as sales surged.Staples said profit dropped 72 percent to $78.1 million, hurt by charges related to its restructuring.EconomyThe U.S. job market report offered good news all around, the best reading in months on the state of the economy. Jobs? There were 236,000 more of them on U.S. employers' payrolls in February than in January. The jobless rate? Down to 7.7 percent, from 7.9 percent. Wages? Private-sector pay rose 0.6 percent as people both worked more hours and at a higher hourly wage.China's exports surged more than expected in February in a possible sign of stronger global demand. Exports leaped 21.8 percent, well ahead of analysts' expectations of single-digit growth as companies shut down for the Lunar New Year holiday.European Central Bank President Mario Draghi stuck to his view that the euro region will gradually recover later this year even as officials trimmed their economic forecasts and considered cutting interest rates. The ECB left its benchmark interest rate at 0.75 percent, a record low. The ECB predicted the 17-nation euro economy will shrink 0.5 percent this year, more than the 0.3 percent contraction forecast three months ago. The 2014 growth estimate fell to 1 percent from 1.2 percent.Britain stood isolated against a broad majority of European Union countries in refusing to back legislation that would strictly limit bankers' bonuses.Surging stock and home prices have allowed Americans to regain the $16 trillion in wealth they lost to the Great Recession.WashingtonThe White House said consumers should be allowed to unlock their phones and tablets and switch networks after their contracts run out without fear of breaking the law.The Obama administration, while struggling with sequester-mandated cuts, has asked lawmakers to approve a permanent hike in the U.S. contribution to the International Monetary Fund.TransitionsToyota Motor has tapped Mark Hogan, a former executive at General Motors, to join its board, the first time in the Japanese automaker's 76-year history it is appointing directors from outside the company.The Detroit City Council voted 7 to 1 to challenge Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder's (R) declaration that the city faces a financial crisis and that the state should appoint an emergency financial manager.- From news services and staff reports$73 billionCarlos Slim's net worthMexico's Slim remains the world's richest man, according to Forbes, while Warren Buffett ($53.5 billion) dropped out of the top three for the first time since 2000. Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg ($4.2 billion) fell 31 spots. A record 1,426 people around the world made Forbes magazine's annual tally of billionaires. Liliane Bettencourt ($30 billion) - whose family owns a stake in L'Oreal - is theworld's richest woman.