Every year, Amazon.com earns billions of dollars in revenue from its "personalization" technologies, such as product recommendations and computer-generated emails, that are estimated to account for as much as one-third of all sales. The amount of data needed to feed these tools is mammoth. But its value on Amazon's ledger? Zero.Similar stories repeat across the economy. Google can answer search requests in three-tenths of a second because it indexes and stores multiple copies of the entire World Wide Web on its servers. Its search system can predict a query before it is fully typed based on aggregating the billions of searches it gets each day. And yet, though Google puts a value on its hardware, software, patents and research expenses, there is no good way to calculate the value of its data, even as it is central to the company's success."Big data" -- the vast quantity of information now available thanks to the Internet, and which can be manipulated in ways never before possible -- is becoming a backbone of corporate performance and economic growth. Yet its value isn't well understood.One reason is accounting rules, which have trouble handling intangibles. Ephemeral things such as brands are usually counted as an asset when one is purchased, since there has been a market transaction to give it a monetary worth. They cannot easily be recorded on the books when a company develops them internally. This is usually the case with data, too.The stock market can capture some, but not all, of this sort of value. What is Facebook's $67 billion market capitalization, after all, if not a bet on the commercial usefulness of the information it holds on one-seventh of humanity? But this presumes that investors in the aggregate are savvy enough to price into the shares the economic potential of the data's future earnings.That's a stretch. People are lucky enough if they can figure out how to change their Facebook privacy settings.The value of information captured today is increasingly in the myriad secondary uses to which it is put -- not just the primary purpose for which it was collected. In the past, shopkeepers kept a record of all transactions so that they could tally the sums at the end of the day. The sales data were used to understand sales. Only more recently have retailers parsed those records to look for business trends.Wal-Mart looked into its huge database a decade ago and noticed that when sales of flashlights and batteries increased before a hurricane, so did sales of Pop-Tarts. By stocking them with emergency storm supplies at the front of stores, the retailer could both better serve customers and spur sales.Withbig data, information is more potent, and it can be applied to areas unconnected with what it initially represented. Health officials could use Google's history of search queries -- for things like cough syrup or sneezes -- to track the spread of the seasonal flu in the United States. The Bank of England has used Google searches as a leading indicator for housing prices in the United Kingdom. Other central banks have studied search queries as a gauge for changes in unemployment.Companies world-wide are starting to understand that no matter what industry they are in, data is among their most precious assets. Harnessed cleverly, the data can unleash new forms of economic value.A few years ago, the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, which handles many of the world's international wire transfers between bank accounts, found a strong correlation between wire transfers and the growth rate of a country's gross domestic product. Swift now offers quarterly national GDP forecasts (free of charge) based on the payment data flowing across its network. Elsewhere, the traffic-prediction company Inrix sells data from cars' satellite-navigation systems to investors -- who can, for example, analyze the traffic near the stores of major retailers and estimate their sales performance before they announces their earnings publicly.Putting a price tag on data is certainly a rich opportunity for the finance sector. Doing so is essential. Otherwise, the information will be undervalued, and the potential for further developing -- and monetizing --big datamay not be fully realized.The inverse risk is that firms may value data unreasonably, presuming that every byte is a possible "Rembrandt in the attic." This could encourage firms to hoard data, making it tougher for a market in data to form because supply is limited.Big dataposes a challenge to companies, as the Internet did a decade ago. In some cases, older firms are better positioned because they already have the data. Yet to reap these rewards, this data -- the oil of the information economy -- needs to be treated as an economic asset. If not, we are condemned to confirm the old quip that a cynic knows the price of everything and the value of nothing.---Mr. Cukier is the data editor of The Economist. Mr. Mayer-Schonberger is a professor of Internet governance and regulation at the Oxford Internet Institute. They are the authors of "Big Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think" (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013).Subscribe to WSJ:Credit: By Kenneth Cukier and Viktor Mayer-Schonberger