Corporate executives face a daunting obstacle when it comes to reaping the benefits ofbig data: Who's going to tell them what it all means?The problem starts with demand. A growing number of companies are intensifying their efforts to analyze huge amounts of data to gain a competitive edge--or at least to keep up with their rivals. "Companies don't want to be left behind," says Niren Sirohi, vice president of predictive analytics at iKnowtion LLC, a data-analytics consulting firm that specializes in marketing. He has six data miners in his group at the TeleTech Holdings Inc. unit, up from three last year, to meet growing demand from companies seeking outside help.The training of data scientists hasn't caught up with that demand, leaving companies searching for talent and especially, some say, for the relatively few people with extensive experience in the field. "There is definitely a shortage of folks at the top end," says Jim Blomo, engineering manager of data mining at Yelp Inc., who manages a group of eight people dedicated to analyzing data for ways to improve the reviews site's search-engine quality and results.The talent gap makes data scientists expensive. Tech workers with a full complement ofbig-dataanalysis skills are paid on average 11.5% more than people without those skills, according to research firm Foote Partners LLC. Top data scientists can command multiple job offers with salaries well into the six figures and sometimes even seven figures, says Ravi Mhatre, a partner at venture-capital firm Lightspeed Venture Partners who specializes in information technology. "If you have proven skills, you can write your ticket," he says.To find data scientists, companies are employing techniques such as recruiting on college campuses, sponsoring computer-coding contests and trolling industry conferences. This semester, Mr. Blomo is teaching a graduate-level course at the University of California, Berkeley called "Data Mining and Analytics in Intelligent Business Services." He says the course, which he also taught last spring, is a great way to spread the word about Yelp and find potential talent in this competitive environment."We've had many students apply for jobs at Yelp," he says. "Every company will be fighting for these types of folks."Mr. Ante is a deputy bureau chief for The Wall Street Journal in New York. He can be reached at .Credit: By Spencer E. Ante