When Angel Taveras, the mayor of Providence, R.I., got wind of a lucrative contest among mayors over ideas for improving their cities, his mind turned immediately to children.A product of Head Start and later Harvard University, Mr. Taveras had been longing to do something for children whose parents could not afford preschool. His idea, using some spiffy technology to track the number of words that children 5 and under are exposed to each day, won his city first place and $5 million from Bloomberg Philanthropies, the foundation of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York, which oversaw the contest.Four other cities -- Houston, Chicago, Santa Monica, Calif., and Philadelphia -- were whittled down from more than 300 that competed for the innovation grants at a time when most American cities are struggling to pay for existing programs to improve life there, let alone establish new ones. Those cities will get $1 million to get their new projects going. "As cities are seeing cutbacks," Mr. Taveras said, "it's critically important to create innovation."The program, known as the Mayors Challenge, sought ideas last summer from cities across the country with populations of 30,000 or more, and this fall narrowed the list to 20 finalists, whose staffs came to New York for an "ideas camp" where they worked to hone and advance their proposals. There were four criteria for cities. "Was their idea visionary, was it impactful and can it spread to other cities," said James Anderson, the director of the charity's government-innovation program. Also, cities needed to show they could pull off their projects.Providence took the grand prize for its plans to improve early childhood literacy. The children who participate in the program would wear a small device called a digital language processor that would record their daily interactions with adults. Those would then be converted into audio files containing the day's adult word count and the number of conversational turns. That data would be used to help parents in monthly coaching sessions improve the quality of their conversations to improve their children's vocabulary.Houston received a grant for a new recycling program that would allow residents to be free of sorting. "We are the only major city in America that does not have a garbage fee," Mayor Annise Parker Said. "Because there is no economic incentive for people to recycle," the city seeks to make it increasingly convenient.Santa Monica will get its $1 million to carry out its Wellbeing Project. An index will look at economic vitality, education, social relationships, health and environmental indicators to create a single view on the well-being of residents of the beachside city.In Philadelphia, city officials will work on the vexing problem of procurement of goods and services, which hamstrings many cities with rules and high costs, by putting together a process that would widen the field and increase the pool of organizations and companies that bid.In Chicago, Mayor Rahm Emanuel will try to build abig datasystem to better understand various trends around the city, similar to programs used in New York and elsewhere to track crime patterns."These five ideas reflect the most promising innovations that are emerging from city halls around the country," said Mayor Bloomberg, in an e-mail, "and we're excited to support them because they have the potential to be replicated in cities large and small. While Washington is paralyzed by partisanship, mayors are moving forward with bold new solutions to many of our nation's toughest problems."