AUSTIN, Texas -- For the bleeding-edge techies who gather here at the annual South by Southwest conference, data rules. But a question lingers just behind the hype: Who rules the data?It is a tale of two conferences. Many whiz-bang gadgets and services discussed here celebrate new ways to collect and use data about our interests, lives, and even bodies. General Electric Co. touted wearable self-tracking devices made by a range of companies, like hats that measure brain activity during sleep and bras that can help detect cancer."Data is the next currency for health," said Lisa Kennedy, chief marketing officer of GE's Healthymagination initiative.To underscore how even mundane things can now crunch data, Frog Design built augmented-reality Porta Potties that indicate how long their occupants are inside and whether they were standing or sitting."The line between 'information' and 'too much information' is going to be much shorter than the line for these Porta Potties," said Mark Rolston, Frog's chief creative officer.But where is the line? In a standing-room-only demo of Google Inc.'s Glass cyborg spectacles at the conference, senior developer advocate Timothy Jordan extolled the virtues of getting data physically closer to the body, such as taking and sharing a photo without needing to hold up a camera.But he said little about the new social dynamics that such always-on tech could create. "We are the pioneers that get to decide how this fits into our lives," Mr. Jordan said.Stephen Wolfram, the scientist who founded the company behind the Wolfram Alpha search engine, recounted his experience at the conference wearing a new small gadget called a Memoto that takes a photo every 30 seconds and saves the data to the Internet. Mr. Wolfram's teenage son ran a facial-identification program on all those photos to tease out images of everyone his dad had met in Austin.To Mr. Wolfram, it was a sign of what's possible -- even easy -- with the sensors and computational power available today. "In the modern world, everyone should learn data science," he said.Confronting the same new technology, another set of SXSW attendees saw abig databummer -- a world where people were losing control.In a talk, Carnegie Mellon professor Alessandro Acquisiti showed how easily online and offline data can blend, upending current notions of privacy. He presented the results of a series of experiments in which he combined publicly available data with commercial face-recognition software, and was able to identify individuals, including accurately determining their Social Security numbers."Facial recognition is now -- no longer is it the domain of science fiction," he said.Privacy is only one data concern. John Wilbanks, chief commons officer at research nonprofit Sage Bionetworks, began a panel on "health 2.0" by playing a song called "Gimme My Damn Data."While acknowledging the great possibilities of data for improving science and individual health, Mr. Wilbanks lamented the currently "broken" system where people can't easily use data about themselves. "It is very hard to open-source your data," he said. "It is owned by whoever has it -- and it might be considered a corporate secret or private."Charlene Zvolanek, director of experience design at agency Team One, described a present and future in which humans can paint posthumous portraits out of digital detritus. Such inevitable "sentimental uses ofbig data," she said, mean that we don't have control over how we're remembered. In the future, she said, all of our data might be made available to historians, anthropologists and generations to come. "Is it even going to be possible to not be remembered?" she asked.So where is the line? Google's Mr. Jordan provided one answer. At the end of his talk about Glass, an audience member asked why the remarkable hardware couldn't do tasks more remarkable than showing news headlines, reading emails and taking photos. Mr. Jordan said facial-recognition technology, which theoretically could identify who was in front of the user, doesn't actually improve life.Past wearable-technology researchers found such services unhelpful, said Mr. Jordan. "It was something that was in the way all the time," he said. Google's goal with Glass is "the ability to have it there when you want it, and have it go away when you don't."Subscribe to WSJ:Credit: By Geoffrey A. Fowler