If there was one constant in Silicon Valley over the last decade, it was the near steady, profitable growth of Oracle Corp. No longer.Oracle remains a dominant force in technology with $32.7 billion in revenue and database and applications software used by corporations to manage their finances and procurement. Today, its business is being eroded at the edges by smaller, more focused companies offering newer technology.The Redwood City, Calif., company, which delivered three times the total returns of the broader stock market over the last decade, said on Wednesday revenue from new software licenses and subscriptions slid 2% to $2.3 billion in its latest quarter. Its stock fell 9.7% to $32.20 Thursday, its biggest drop since December, 2011.Safra Catz, Oracle's co-president and chief financial officer, blamed the sales miss on Oracle's own miscues rather than underlying demand for its products. It has significantly expanded its sales force, and Ms. Catz said some newer recruits seemed less motivated to close deals in its third quarter than the fourth quarter ending in May--the fiscal year-end deadline that determines commissions. Oracle declined to comment for this article.However, Peter Goldmacher, who follows technology companies at investment manager Cowen and Co., said "there is a larger problem here" than a one-quarter miscue. He noted that Oracle has had three disappointing quarters in the past two years. Oracle still holds a hammerlock on its installed base, he said, but "new companies are offering equivalent or better functionality at a better price," he argued.While Oracle, which was co-founded in 1977 by Chief Executive Larry Ellison, remains the dominant database vendor, the market for so-calledBig Datasoftware is expanding at three times the pace of the overall market. That business is expected to climb nearly 150% over the next five years, compared with 40% for the global database market, estimates David Floyer, co-founder of the research effort called Wikibon.Companies also are warming to the idea that they don't have to spend as much for technology. Even the largest companies are switching to cloud-based technology on a subscription basis requiring no upfront fees. They are experimenting with database technology that is based on Hadoop, free software developed by engineers at Google Inc. and Yahoo Inc.Dave Corchado, CIO at digital marketing agency iCrossing Inc., an Oracle customer, said its new spending is going to Oracle rivals such as Amazon.com Inc. It uses Amazon for computing power and the Hadoop free analytic software. Spending on databases from Oracle "remains intentionally unchanged," he said.Manish Kapoor, CIO of NuStar Energy Corp., says his company decided to move away from Oracle database products for cost reasons. "Database is a commodity business and it is seeing strong competition," he said in an email. He also said the company would have been more likely to use Oracle applications--it doesn't at present--if it had also used Oracle databases.When insurance giant Aetna Inc. went looking for technology to help it analyze disparate data types concerning 18 million customers, it didn't look to established vendors such as Oracle. Michael Palmer, Aetna's head of innovation, said incumbent vendors move too slowly, and that startups such as GNS Healthcare are more apt to more quickly and "drive things at speed."Vendors of cloud software, such as Workday Inc. and Salesforce.com Inc., offer subscription Web-based software that competes directly with some of Oracle's core products used by companies to manage human resources and management of sales prospects at much lower prices.Salesforce.com charges $125 a month for its software under a one-year contract while Oracle's marketing software costs thousands of dollars a user, requires a minimum number of users and an annual fee.Oracle hasn't ignored technology and pricing trends. Since October 2011, it has acquired cloud-computing companies RightNow Technologies Inc., Taleo Corp., and Eloqua Inc. for more than $4.3 billion combined.But customers of those companies are more likely to be marketing executives than chief information officers, says Rebecca Wettemann, an analyst with Nucleus Research Inc., and willing to bolt to an independent cloud vendor than work with Oracle, which has a reputation for tough negotiating.Workday, which launched its IPO last October on Thursday changed hands at $61.11, up 27%. Salesforce.com closed $172.73, up 11% in the last six months, and announced a four-for-one stock split after the market closed on Thursday.Oracle pioneered the relational database, which stores data in columns and rows, and has dominated that space for some thirty years. Today, a new type of database known as NoSQL stores and facilitates the analysis of vast quantities of data at a much lower cost. Facebook Inc. and AutoZone Inc. use NoSQL databases.Other companies have embraced NoSQL databases to store and analyze data as disparate as email, transcripts of call center conversations, and tweets. It allows banks to dissect public records for economic trends not revealed through government data, or retailers to understand what consumers may want to buy.Rachael King contributed to this article.Write to Michael Hickins atCredit: By Michael Hickins