Larry Brilliant is president and CEO of Skoll Global Threats Fund, an organization devoted to building alliances and finding solutions to some of the world's most pressing problems.-- On climate change: Climate change is the greatest risk we face. It's the great exacerbater. It exacerbates the risk of pandemics. It exacerbates the risks of water. It exacerbates the risk of conflict. Take a look at South Asia, where China owns the ice, India owns the water and has 21 dams, and Pakistan and Bangladesh are out of luck. Pakistan's entire food production is dependent on two other nuclear-armed countries.-- On CEO priorities: I was the CEO of two public companies. When I'm looking at quarterly profits, I start working on the next 90 days before this 90 days is over. How can I look up, in all honesty, and say, "There's an odorless, colorless, tasteless, invisible gas that's going to destroy the world 20 years from now"?Our structure is wrong. The incentive system is misaligned with having these powerful, strong, smart CEOs focus on the issues ahead.Climate change has an extremely high probability if you're looking at a 20-year time frame. But in a quarter, it has a low probability.-- On what's holding back clean-energy investment: When Steve Jobs got his genome sequenced, it was $100,000. Within five years, it'll be $100 or $200. If I was a businessperson, I would say, "There's a tremendous amount of money to be made in the combination ofbig data, epidemiological analysis and what's going to be a treasure trove of data from genomic sequencing." Who's going to be trying to find the new drugs? Who's going to try to find the effect of drugs already on genes? That's the place that I would be looking as an investor. Not climate.We're truly not going to make a huge change [on attacking global warming] unless we have a price on carbon. Until there's a price on carbon and entrepreneurs know what to aim at and companies know what to produce, we're not going to make that huge progress that we need.Subscribe to WSJ: