High-speed computing is all the rage in the PC world these days, but speed does not come cheap.In any computer store, you can find dazzling machines with turbo-charged microprocessors and rapid-access disk drives that will run rings around the lumbering IBM PC and XT clones that still hold down the fort in millions of offices. Their performance is delicious, but the prices can be hard to digest. Only a couple of years ago, $6,000 would have seemed a hefty price tag for a serious business computer. Today you can easily pay twice that for a high-speed 80386 machine with a couple of million bytes of fast access memory and a quick hard disk.But there are ways to speed up your klutzy old computer without breaking the bank. You'll never quite turn an ancient IBM PC into the full equivalent of a new IBM Model 80, but various gimmicks exist that will make the old clunker run faster. Today I'll look at a few approaches to the goal of creating a Poor Man's Turbo.A key step that will increase performance of almost any computer is speeding up the hard disk. A lackadaisical hard disk can slow down any computer, even the mightiest 80386 brute. One solution is to install a faster disk drive.Hard disk units are generally rated in terms of average access time-how many thousandths of a second it takes the drive to find and read a single digit of information. "High-speed" hard disk drives are those boasting an average access time of 30 milliseconds or less. That's about twice as fast as the average drives installed in off-the-shelf PCs. A high-speed 20-megabyte hard drive will cost $400 or less, and you can install it yourself in 20 minutes. You'll notice the difference immediately.There are software gimmicks as well to increase hard disk performance. The hot new idea in this area is a genre of programs known as "defraggers." I've tried a couple of these, and they really work.A "defragger" tidies up your hard disk so that data stored on it can be found faster. When MS-DOS writes a data file -a word-processing text, for example, or abig data-base compilation-onto a disk, it often fragments the file into small pieces that will fit into whatever nooks and crannies of storage space are available. This maximizes disk space, but it splits up a single file into several chunks. When you ask a program to retrieve that file, it has to hunt around the whole disk and reassemble the pieces. Meanwhile, you're sitting there drumming your fingers and wondering why your computer seems so slow.When you unleash a "defragger" program, it finds all the files that have been fragmented and puts them back together. (Just for peace of mind, you'll want to be sure you've backed up all the important stuff on your disk before you do this.) This can make a definitive improvement in hard disk performance. particularly the first use. After you have unfragmented a disk once, it will probably be a couple of months or more before performance degrades to the point where it's useful again.I've used the defragger programs that come with two tried-and-true utility packages: the $150 Norton Utilities and the $100 Mace Utilities. I also ran an $80 program called "PolyBoost II." They all do the job. If you have access to CompuServe or another electronic bulletin board, you might want to try a shareware defragger called "SST", which costs just $10, or whatever you choose to pay.Another relatively new idea to improve hard-disk performance is found in programs that change the disk's "interleave" factor-that is, the mapping of how bits of data are stored on the disk. Two such programs are the $60 "SpinRite" and the $90 "hTest-hFormat." Both of those offerings also check for and correct disk problems, thus helping you avoid the dreaded message "unrecoverable read error"Not all the speed-up gimmicks available are new. Two golden oldies in this area that still make your computer run faster are the disk cache and the RAM disk.Both of these approaches are based on the fact that access to data in RAM memory is faster than access to a disk. A "disk cache" takes often-used program or data files from a disk and stores them in memory. Then, when a program has to access those files, it can grab them from memory-saving time that would have been consumed in accessing the disk. A RAM disk makes a section of memory act just like a disk drive. The user won't see any difference in operation, except that disk access becomes instantaneous when you're using a RAM disk. Since the RAM disk also makes its unnecessary to spin the disk drive and find data, RAM disks are useful for laptop computer owners who need to conserve battery power.Software programs to set up a disk cache or a RAM disk are standard on most versions of MS-DOS and OS/2 today; five minutes in the DOS manual will tell you how to set them up. If you don't have these utilities in DOS, many commercial, shareware and free programs are available to do the job. I have found that a RAM disk makes a stunning difference in speed. The advantages of the disk cache are less noticeable, but they probably exist.There are software programs on the market that provide all these speed-up tricks in a single package. Many have names that are supposed to suggest optimum speed: "DS Optimize," "VOpt," "PolyBoost II," "OpTune." The two old reliables, Norton Utilities and Mace Utilities, also include speed-up programs. Until you've saved enough to buy a 25-MegaHertz 80386 screamer, these programs can make your old computer run faster.