UNTIL AN UNUSUAL CONSULTANT went to work at his office, Robert Fallat used to diagnose patients the way most doctors do -- by running them through a battery of tests and poring over the resulting data.Today Dr. Fallat, a San Francisco lung specialist, puts many of his patients through a preliminary session with an adviser called Puff. Puff reads the test data and gives Dr. Fallat a report that names the patient's malady and often recommends a course of treatment. Dr. Fallat says he usually follows Puff's advice.Puff -- short for "pulmonary function" -- is a computer program that Dr. Fallat designed to contain all the special rules he uses to translate information about his patients into expert diagnoses. When Dr. Fallat feeds data into Puff, the program sifts through it and analyzes it, using the same logic Dr. Fallat has developed in years of study and practice.For two decades, programs like Puff, known as expert systems, were the province of computer scientists working in artificial intelligence laboratories. But today, as expert-system technology becomes more refined and computers grow cheaper, such programs are finding their way into many day-to-day office applications, providing advice on matters ranging from oil-field analysis to bank lending.AT THE SAME TIME, expert systems are changing the ways people use computers. In most cases, the value of today's computers lies in their ability to perform calculations speedily and store data efficiently. Expert systems provide something else: the power to solve problems in specialized areas that normally only seasoned experts can handle.DM Data Inc., a Scottsdale, Ariz., research firm, estimates the market for commercial expert systems has blossomed to $34 million this year from $4 million in 1981. By the 1990s, DM Data predicts, expert-system software will be a mass-market product. For instance, says Harvey P. Newquist, an analyst at the firm, "you're going to be able to get a disk for your personal computer that will tell you how to fix your car -- you'll plug in that it's belching out smoke and it'll tell you exactly what to do."With conventional programs, computers can wade intobig databases and retrieve whatever items the user wants to see. Expert systems go further: they draw conclusions from this information according to the same analytic methods a savvy professional would use. A medical diagnosis system, for instance, doesn't simply match up a symptom with every disease in its data base that lists the symptom. It reduces the number of possible diagnoses by running through a list of logical rules, usually phrased as "if-then" statements.THESE STATEMENTS may be as simple as "If the patient is male, then he isn't pregnant," or as complex as "If the patient shows overinflation, fixed airway obstruction and low diffusion capacity, then he has emphysema." The best expert systems, like the best human experts, draw not only on textbook rules but also on rules of thumb developed over years of practice.Medical programs like Dr. Fallat's Puff are among the most widespread new applications of expert systems. At the University of Pittsburgh, Dr. Jack Myers has programmed over 600 diseases into a giant internal-medicine system called Caduceus. The system has suggested hundreds of correct diagnoses and regularly solves the thorny cases presented as weekly clinical puzzles in the New England Journal of Medicine, Dr. Myers says. Both Dr. Fallat and Dr. Myers say they are preparing to market their programs to other doctors.At Stanford University Hospital's oncology clinic, researchers are cautiously testing a more advanced program, which is designed to help steer doctors through the elaborate, often dangerous procedures for treating cancer patients.MANY COMPANIES, meanwhile, are starting to invest in expert-system technology. Digital Equipment Corp. says it saves millions of dollars a year by having an expert system called XSEL figure out which of a billion combinations of components its mainframe-computer customers need.At Schlumberger Ltd., scientists are working up a system called Dipmeter Advisor to analyze exploratory data from prospective oil and gas fields. In Sunnyvale, Calif., a young company, Syntelligence Inc., offers expert systems to help banks and insurance companies assess risks in loans and policies. A neighboring concern, Teknowledge, in Palo Alto, designed a system for Elf-Acquitaine, the French oil giant, that offers solutions when drills get stuck underground, an arcane and expensive problem.In the new wave of expert-system products, many artificial-intelligence companies are bringing out packages that let experts design their own software. These products, say their makers, will let companies computerize their specialists' skills without passing along in-house tricks of the trade to outsiders.Some experts may find themselves one-upped by the very systems they design. "I'm more likely than Puff to make a human error," says Dr. Fallat, the lung specialist. "Some days you're feeling bad and you call everybody severe, whereas if you were feeling better you might have called them mild cases," he says. "A computer's much more consistent than that."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal