CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- Four years ago, Jim P. Manzi joined skyrocketing Lotus Development Corp., and saw his own career take off as well.A newspaper reporter and management consultant by experience, he had lucked into a company filled with inventive iconoclasts who couldn't do what he could: market and manage. Then in 1986, after just two years on the job, he watched the company's founder unexpectedly walk out the door, leaving Mr. Manzi at the top: chairman, chief executive and president. To cap it all, Mr. Manzi last year earned nearly $1 million in salary and $25.4 million from stock options he exercised. That made him one of America's best compensated chief executives.But the good fortune of the 36-year-old executive may be running out, for there is trouble in Lotusland, and critics are pinning much of the blame on Mr. Manzi. The company has lost its premier spot in personal computer software to Microsoft Corp. of Redmond, Wash., and faces the prospect this quarter of an unaccustomed earnings decline. Market share has slipped, veteran managers are fleeing the executive suite, the company's stock price has plunged, and management has made a string of product announcements that industry techies ridicule as "vaporware" -- software Lotus keeps promising, but hasn't delivered.An updated version of Lotus's big-selling 1-2-3 financial calculation program, which Mr. Manzi calls "absolutely, the most important thing we're doing as a company," is months late, and competitors meantime are going after Lotus's customers. Lotus says it hopes to get the new product out by the end of the year. But if it misses that deadline by much, or if the product doesn't live up to its promise, Lotus may become just one more former highflier in the high-tech game."If the cash cow gets sick, that will be one unhappy dairy," says William Zachmann of International Data Corp., a market research firm. Adds Stewart Alsop, editor of P.C. Letter, an industry newsletter published in Redwood City, Calif.: "I see a company that is incredibly vulnerable."Mr. Manzi is taking the heat both for Lotus's fumbling and for a personal style that some say has hurt the company's image. Mr. Manzi, who is vocally competitive, is sometimes sarcastic and smart alecky, perplexing many industry analysts and reporters who influence customers and buyers of stock.Curt Monash, president of the consulting firm New World Ventures Inc. in New York, recalls that one time, after Lotus introduced a new product, Mr. Manzi said to a gathering of analysts, "I've anticipated your questions and prepared answers. Here they are. Yes. No. No. I can't comment." Mr. Monash says he likes that kind of humor, but others don't.In fact, many technically adept entrepreneurs who pioneered in the industry disdain Mr. Manzi, who isn't a programmer. William Gates, founder of archrival Microsoft, says "it bugged me" when Mr. Manzi gave the keynote address at the giant Comdex trade show last November and suggested the time for visionaries was ending and that businessmen like himself would be taking over leadership of the industry.Then there was Mr. Manzi's run-in with the hometown Boston Globe. After the Globe published a series of articles on Lotus that contained some negative comments about the company, and an error, the chief executive ordered employees to stop talking to the paper's reporters. One Globe staffer subsequently wrote a scathing column on Lotus, asserting: "The fish is rotten at the head." Mr. Manzi eventually made his peace with the Globe, but the feud had already worked its damage.Much of Lotus's arrogant image has to do with Mr. Manzi's self-confident style. His corner office at Lotus has a view across the Charles River toward Boston, and a sign on a shelf reads: "IBM -- You Mean the Lotus of Hardware." His attitude toward uninformed visitors: "I don't like to talk to people who aren't terribly well prepared." And toward the danger of losing business because of the delay in updating 1-2-3: "Our customers are hooked on our strategy." The outlook for Lotus, he insists, is bright.In the past, criticism of Mr. Manzi was muted because Lotus's results were so spectacular. The history of the company is part of the mythology of the personal computer industry.Started by Mitchell D. Kapor, a former disk jockey and transcendental meditation instructor, Lotus succeeded beyond expectations. Its first product, 1-2-3, far surpassed the capabilities of its competition, Visicalc, the first computerized spreadsheet. For 1983, its first year, Lotus forecast sales of $3 million and then shipped $53 million worth of 1-2-3. Employment has grown from what Mr. Kapor called "a small band setting out on a great adventure," to 2,300 people.Mr. Kapor, an eloquent evangelist for his technology, wore Hawaiian print shirts and baggy chinos at the office. He quickly tired of management duties. As the company matured, he leaned increasingly on Mr. Manzi, a McKinsey andamp; Co. consultant who joined Lotus to head sales and marketing. "That was the perfect balance, because you had a company with a lot of soul," says Katie Payne, one of the eight public-relations chiefs Lotus has had in its short history. Now, she adds, "it's all yuppie and no hippie." (Mr. Kapor, now 37 years old, heads a small software firm that is developing new products.)Lotus's heavy reliance on its 1-2-3 software compounds the company's problems. Last year, it accounted for about two-thirds of the company's $396 million in revenue. Since 1984, Lotus's only successful new products have been in secondary segments of the market, such as graphics. Its software for Apple Computer Inc.'s fast-selling Macintosh flopped. Lotus hasn't yet entered thebig data-base market and its word-processor, though well regarded, is selling slowly. It hasn't even had much luck selling software programs designed to enhance 1-2-3.Lotus isn't in any danger of disappearing. A $180 million cash hoard and an 18% after-tax profit margin give it a comfortable cushion. And Lotus says that most of its four million 1-2-3 users remain loyal despite the delay in upgrading it. "We're better equipped today than we were six months ago to handle the coming changes in the industry," Mr. Manzi says. Many outsiders agree. "Look out to 1989, and the product cycle momentum could be very strong," for Lotus, says Richard Sherlund, an analyst with Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co.Part of Lotus's problem is the reach of its ambition for the 1-2-3 update, which includes a daring strategic plan. Lotus rewrote 1-2-3 in a different computer language to make it easier to transfer to other types of computers, ranging from International Business Machines Corp. mainframes to Apple Macintosh personal computers.That flexibility appeals to corporate customers who want to run the same spreadsheet throughout an organization to simplify sharing data and consolidating information. Lotus also is adding several features. The result: a program requiring so much memory it won't fit on most personal computers. Lotus is trying to reduce the amount of code and make the program speedier. That has led to the delays.Although software delays are common in the industry, the delay in 1-2-3 shook Lotus's reputation for tight management. Sales and earnings are slipping below expectations because Lotus was counting on many of its existing customers by now to be paying the $150 Lotus will charge to upgrade to the new version of 1-2-3. Worse, the delay has allowed Microsoft and Borland International Inc., of Scotts Valley, Calif., to push new products in the spreadsheet wars. Many reviewers prefer both Microsoft's Excel and Borland's Quattro to the existing 1-2-3, and both companies say they are making inroads into Lotus's estimated 70% share of the market. Four of the Big 8 accounting firms are buying Excel for at least some workers. And Borland says that in June, Quattro's unit sales were 12% of the market. Computer Intelligence Corp., a market research firm in La Jolla, Calif., says its research of large companies forecasts a drop in purchases of 1-2-3.Adding to the company's problems is the exodus of a number of management veterans, including six of 17 vice presidents, in the past five months. While some retired or moved on to better opportunities, others were pushed out. By way of explanation, Mr. Manzi says: "Transitions are constant." Some executives, who thought they might be considered for the No. 2 job at Lotus, left after Mr. Manzi brought in Frank King, a widely respected 17-year veteran of IBM, as senior vice president in charge of software products. Others simply say the graying of Lotus made it less fun."What it's going through is very normal for a high-growth company," says Daniel MacMillan, a 57-year-old vice president who retired. "Maybe it isn't as magical as it was."Even before this exodus, disillusionment within the company was growing. Publicity about Mr. Manzi's big paycheck "didn't go over well at the company," says one former employee, particularly since Mr. Manzi had just recently sent out an "austerity" letter asking the staff to control spending.In February, Mr. Manzi and other insiders sold big chunks of the stock they acquired through their options. That was just a month before the price of Lotus stock plunged more than five points on news of the delay in 1-2-3. Securities and Exchange Commission regulators looked into the sales, but haven't disclosed any findings. Lotus says Mr. Manzi and the insiders sold partly to get cash to pay taxes due on the options, and weren't acting on advance knowledge of bad news. Mr. Manzi and other Lotus officials say the spate of bad news about the company is coincidental.Moreover, they say, the company's problems are being solved. As evidence, they point to Mr. King. His appointment put a software developer at the top executive level for the first time since Mr. Kapor quit. "He has much more credibility with the engineers, and he provides a voice at the executive level," says David Reed, the software developer who heads the project to redesign 1-2-3. Mr. King says he has improved communications among the more than 100 programmers working on the project and has encouraged weekly parties to bolster morale. He has also banned the practice of announcing products before Lotus is sure of the shipping date.Today, all but two executives have big-company backgrounds. In contrast to Lotus's early history, the majority of the company's top executives are now over 40. Susan Yeomans, vice president human resources, says staff turnover at Lotus is about 14% annually, well below the 20% norm for the computer business. Only 5% is unwanted turnover, she says.Lotus, meanwhile, has stepped up marketing efforts. To assuage users impatient for the new spreadsheet, it is giving away a program that improves existing copies of 1-2-3, including removing a hated copy protection that blocked users from duplicating their software disks. It is expanding its list of authorized dealers to 5,500 from 3,500 to pursue small businesses and, for the first time, mass merchandisers, such as the Lechmere chain of discount stores. Most important, Lotus has worked to cement its ties with big customers, making sure they know what Lotus is doing and understand its strategy. "In the past {salespeople} spent all their time offensively," says Steven Crummey, Lotus senior vice president for sales. "This year, some of it is defensive."But can Lotus hold the market with its strategy? Small companies and individuals aren't likely to respond to the pitch Lotus makes to big users about the compatibility 1-2-3 will allow among different computers. Also, Lotus expects to market its product primarily to company data-processing managers, even though computer use is still highly decentralized. In the past, software products often have caught on in companies first through individual use. Lotus says that pattern has changed and that data-processing managers are now the key decision makers.Phillippe Kahn, chairman of rival Borland, says Lotus is focusing too much on marketing, and has lost sight of the need for technical pizazz. "In terms of marketing acumen, Lotus is smarter than we are," he says. But, "when you have marketing groups designing a product and telling Randamp;D guys to build it, you may have the wrong architects."That notion, not surprisingly, raises Mr. Manzi's hackles: "Our bill for paper for 1-2-3," he boasts, "will be bigger than all of Borland."---Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal