Consolidated Insurance Group recently pulled the plug on the IBM 3090 mainframe at its Wilmington, Del., headquarters.Technicians drained the cooling fluid and wheeled the minivan-length computer out on a dolly. Wayne Read, data-processing chief, shut off the air conditioners that kept the glass-walled computer room at a constant 67 degrees. Now he's planning a party to celebrate the company's conversion from the $3 million mainframe to a $300,000 network of personal computers.Sitting in a cramped room is the heart of the new system: seven powerful PCs -- the "servers" that control the central data bases -- and the disk drives that store much of its data. But most of its muscle is in 150 desktop PCs. And the PC users love it. Instead of queuing up and eventually getting a lengthy report from the mainframe, they use their own software to tap the corporate data base. They get the information electronically, pick the parts they want and print them out on a desk-side printer.Many users "are very excited" about getting information so quickly, Mr. Read says. "With mainframes, you wait a day or two. Then, you may not like it and have another two-day turnaround."In switching to PCs, Consolidated Insurance appears to be in the vanguard of a revolution. Personal computers have been the fastest-growing sector of the computer industry for a decade, of course, but most of them have taken on new tasks or replaced typewriters and cash registers rather than doing the heavy lifting performed by mainframes. Sending out bills, tracking corporate accounts and managing payables and receivables has been considered too important to entrust to small computers. PC buffs talked about getting rid of mainframes, but few companies did so.Even five years ago, any notion of replacing a mainframe with PCs was heresy. And impossible: PCs weren't powerful enough. But as PCs get ever faster and remain astonishingly cheap, more and more companies are concluding that their mainframes are dinosaurs. They cost too much; some run as high as $20 million. And PCs, besides being far cheaper, can do some jobs better than mainframes can.So, at long last, PCs are beginning to move into the core mainframe markets, the corporate data-processing centers.The move is being resisted by most data-processing managers, who were reared in a mainframe world and don't want to slash their staffs. And it is viewed skeptically by many chief executives. Moreover, some companies with huge data bases would be hard-pressed to break them into smaller chunks for PC networks. In other cases, the right PC software still isn't available.However, the experiences of some leading-edge companies demonstrate that switching to PC networks is often feasible and highly cost-effective. "In almost every large mainframe shop, you could cut costs at least 30%," contends David Gajda, the president of RNG Associates, a Livonia, Mich., computer consultant.Dropping mainframes isn't painless. At Consolidated Insurance, which expects to cut annual operating costs by $1 million, 30 people used to do mainframe work and write new software when users asked for different information. Now, just 10 staffers are left; the rest started job-hunting as soon as they learned of the move to PCs. "You have people who have been in mainframe data-processing for 15 or 20 years. They elected to leave because that's where they want to continue to make their living," Mr. Read says.In addition, the computer business itself seems headed for an upheaval."We're at the early stages of a radical change in the economics of the industry," says William Zachmann, the president of Canopus Research, a Duxbury, Mass., consulting firm. "I'm convinced IBM's troubles haven't even started." With the spread of PC networks, declares Thomas Willmott of Aberdeen Group, a Boston consultant, "The 3090 is dead meat."More and more corporate executives, eager to control rising computer costs, are getting the message. Ronald Peri, president of Computer Support of North America Inc., a Basking Ridge, N.J., consulting firm, says: "In the past year, I've had three corporate presidents say to me, `We want that mainframe out of here.'"At International Business Machines Corp., Martin Clague, a marketing executive in the division that makes mainframes and large systems, concedes that powerful PCs, such as IBM's PS/2 LAN server, can work as "a very small mainframe."But, he adds, "PS/2s don't have the reliability characteristics" needed by any company that can't put up with down time. When more than 150 users are hooked together in more than four separate local-area networks, he says, a corporate customer needs a mainframe to act as an "industrial strength" network manager to supervise them all. The mainframes and their operating systems manage data and communications, detect and recover from errors without crashing, and copy data regularly to prevent accidental loss."All those things require fairly sophisticated machine design," he says.At Digital Equipment Corp., John Rose, group manager for PC and PC-integration businesses, says the choice of buying its VAX midrange or mainframe computer or a PC as the server for a network "depends on the {software} applications." Digital says its more expensive VAXs "let you attach a significantly larger number of PCs" and let many more people simultaneously query the same data base. Nevertheless, even at very large companies, PC networks have taken over some of the work once done on mainframes. Among such companies are American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., Baxter International Inc. and Rockwell International Corp. Turner Construction Co., the nation's largest general contractor, has widely adopted PC networks and expects to move its payroll system to a network and close down its IBM 4300 mainframe next year.George Colony, president of Forrester Research, says a survey by the Cambridge, Mass., firm found that of 50 big companies, 72% had replaced some minicomputers with networked PCs, and 8% said they had replaced mainframes. Sierra Group, of Tempe, Ariz., says that of big companies it surveys, more plan to cut mainframe and minicomputer spending than are increasing it. As for PCs and networks, two-thirds are increasing spending on these, and almost none cutting.Most growth in mainframe sales is due to upgrades of equipment by existing customers, analysts say. The growth is dwindling. The Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association predicts that U.S. unit sales of mainframes will rise just 2.6% a year through 1998, down from its 3.3% estimate two years ago. It sees PC sales surging 14.5%.PC networks' biggest advantage is cost. A $10,000, state-of-the-art PC handles up to eight million instructions a second, by some counts about the same as an $800,000, bottom-of-the-line IBM 3090. Compaq Computer Corp. says its new $20,000 SystemPro PC is six times faster than a Digital Equipment VAX minicomputer costing $150,000.IBM disputes such speed comparisons as "simplistic." Like Digital, it contends that processor speed ratings are only a minor consideration in evaluating computer systems. They say that their large systems, unlike basic PCs, have very fast communication channels and that their well-developed software systems facilitate automatic backup. In addition, mainframe software developers long ago solved the problem of several people simultaneously trying to get a record and alter it. PC-network developers have devised solutions, but they haven't been as thoroughly debugged over as many years.Nevertheless, NCR Corp. Chairman Charles Exley says that microprocessor-based systems have a 100-to-1 cost advantage over mainframes and that it will soon rise to 300-to-1. Customers are beginning to notice such differentials.For years, Home Mutual Life Insurance Co., of Baltimore, depended on a Honeywell mainframe that cost $400,000 used when acquired 12 years ago and a Data General MV 10000 that cost $300,000 five years ago. Howard F. Brenner, executive vice president, has replaced both with a $160,000 PC network. "We'll be saving that in hardware and software maintenance" alone, he says.Even when keeping mainframes for some jobs, companies are cutting costs by shifting work to networks. At Rank Organisation PLC, the British leisure-time conglomerate, Patrick Beet, director of microservices, says that by moving monthly management reports and year-end accounting to PC networks, the company saves #500,000 a year.Computer-hardware costs are only part of the story. PC networks require much smaller data-processing staffs. CBS Fox Video, a video-distribution company owned by CBS Inc. and Fox Film Corp., once had an IBM 3090 and a 4381 managed by 50 workers. Today, it runs 10 PC networks around the country with just eight dataprocessing professionals at its New York headquarters. Costs have dropped to $1.3 million a year from $5.2 million, says Dean Calabreese, director of management information systems.In addition, PC software is much cheaper to buy than mainframe software. At Consolidated Insurance, a $595 software program now keeps track of debits and credits instead of a $200,000 general-ledger program for mainframes.Inductotherm Corp., a Rancocas, N.J., foundry-furnace maker, is replacing a mainframe, and John Ulrich, the manager of networks, says that "a full-blown manufacturing-resource-planning package on a micro network is $50,000. On a midrange computer it would be $100,000, and on a mainframe $500,000." Moreover, Inductotherm's mainframe software "became so convoluted and complex over the years that only the author could do anything to it without it exploding," Mr. Ulrich says. "It's a helluva investment to throw away, but it's virtually useless."Mr. Peri, the consultant, says developing new programs takes a few days on PC networks; on mainframes, changing the appearance of a single screen may take a programmer a day of painstaking work.PC networks still can't do everything, however. Theodore Klein, a Boston consultant, says mainframes remain best for jobs with very large data bases and constant communication, such as airline reservations. "You're not going to put Citibank's customer accounts on a micro," he says.Mr. Klein says one Midwestern company (which he won't name) fired its senior data-processing executives and moved its computer work to far-flung networks. "They lost synergy and economies of scale," he says. Now, the firm has moved many of the jobs back to the mainframe and centralized its computing again.Switching to PCs also is slowed because PC software developers are still struggling to match the capabilities offered by mainframe data bases. For example, CBS Fox Video has kept a Wang Laboratories Inc. minicomputer to run a royalty accounting program that isn't available on PCs. Many software developers that sell mainframe and midrange software are reluctant to supply PC software because of the much lower prices and profit margins.The big computer makers, which in the past generally urged customers to buy mainframes and minicomputers as "servers" for PC networks, are beginning to make PC-network products. Earlier this year, both IBM and Digital Equipment introduced PC-based servers. And Wang recently introduced software that provides PC networks the same kinds of automatic backup and security that users get with minicomputer software.In addition, a host of small firms are eager to provide what customers need. Network companies such as Novell Inc., 3Com Inc. and closely held Banyan Systems Inc. are growing fast by selling PC-network servers and software. To managebig databases for PC networks, Sequent Computer Systems Inc., Teradata Corp. and closely held NetFrame Systems Inc. have designed powerful servers.Despite such pressures, major computer makers are dawdling in the PC-network area because it's hard to earn enough to support their vast sales, service and support organizations. "The problem," says John Levinson of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., "is that the entire organizational structure built up around the old products is as obsolete as the products are."The big companies, their customers say, would much rather keep selling the more-profitable mainframes. Richard Hock, director of management information systems at Echlin Manufacturing Co., a Branford, Conn., auto-parts maker, cut computing costs one-third by moving corporate-accounting and human-resource programs to PCs. Now, he hopes to replace the minicomputers and mainframes at Echlin's factories with PC networks as well. But, he says, the data-processing managers in the plants "are fearful of losing power, and the hardware vendors are helping fan that fear."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal