Investment professionals in this column's stock-picking contest turned in a highly creditable performance the past six months.As a group, the stocks picked by the four pros gained 38.9%, handily surpassing an 11% rise in the Dow Jones Industrial Average from Sept. 6 through last Thursday.Left in the dust was the Dartboard Portfolio -- four stocks picked by Journal staffers tossing darts at the stock listings. It fell 2.52%. The investment pros now lead the darts 6 to 3 in a continuing series of six-month contests. However, the pros have only a 4-5 record competing with the Dow Jones Industrial Average.First place for the latest six months went to Jonathan Steinberg, publisher of Individual Investor magazine, with a 117% gain in Dell Computer Corp. Kathleen Millard of Chase Manhattan Bank placed second with a 33% gain in Baxter International Inc. Following contest tradition, Mr. Steinberg and Ms. Millard were invited back to give new picks.Mr. Steinberg still thinks highly of Dell Computer as a company, but he'd sell the stock now that it has run up. His new selection is Clearly Canadian Beverage Corp. Based in Vancouver, British Columbia, the company produces Clearly Canadian sparkling water. Bottled water, especially flavored sparkling water, is growing in popularity, Mr. Steinberg notes.Clearly Canadian water entered the U.S. market on the West Coast, and the brand has recently hit the East. Mr. Steinberg, a New Yorker, has been "doing a little test, asking at delis," and concludes that it is selling well.In the fiscal year ended June 30, the company had a loss of $1.2 million, or 14 cents a share, on sales of $17.6 million. But it turned profitable in the fall; Mr. Steinberg estimates it will earn about 58 cents a share this year.The stock, which trades in the over-the-counter market, was quoted yesterday at $7.50 bid, and he thinks it could go to $15 within six months.Ms. Millard, who manages the Equity Income Fund for Chase private banking clients, thinks Eastman Kodak Co. is due to click. "The perception is that this is a company with no growth," she says. The stock has been "as flat as a pancake."But Ms. Millard thinks the restructuring Kodak launched in 1989 is beginning to have an impact, and that the Rochester, N.Y., company will continue to chip away at its expenses, which have long been viewed by Wall Street as hefty. She figures the photography and chemical businesses, both cyclical, should benefit if the economy improves later this year.Besides, she views Kodak as cheap, selling at about a 35% discount to the market. That is, Kodak shares sell for about 11 times per-share earnings, while the average stock sells for about 17 times earnings. Kodak's normal valuation over the years, she says, has ranged from a 20% discount to a 20% premium. Kodak closed yesterday at $44.125. Ms. Millard would buy it up to $48, hoping to see $60 to $65 within a year.Two new investment professionals hop into the contest this month. George Jacobsen is chief investment officer at Trevor Stuart Burton andamp; Jacobsen, a New York money-management firm. Daniel A. Seiver is editor of PAD System Report, a market newsletter. He also is a professor of economics at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio, and author of the book "Outperforming Wall Street."Mr. Jacobsen likes Hubbell Inc. Class B shares, which trade on the American Stock Exchange. Based in Orange, Conn., Hubbell is a century-old electrical equipment company that made its name in such prosaic products as pull-chain light fixtures. Over the years, it has developed dominance in several specialized niches, such as high-voltage switching and transmission gear for utilities.Growth has been steady at about 12% a year, Mr. Jacobsen says. Earnings have grown for 30 years in a row, through several recessions. And Hubbell has a "pristine balance sheet," with long-term debt less than 2% of total capital. The stock closed yesterday at $48.25 a share. Mr. Jacobsen calls it "attractive to accumulate below $50," and hopes for a total return of 15% a year over the next three to five years.Mr. Seiver likes Sequent Computer Systems Inc., based in Beaverton, Ore. Sequent is a leader in parallel-processing computer systems, which are useful in banking, airline and hotel reservation systems, and other fields where instant updating ofbig databases is needed. Sequent was a darling of Wall Street until recently, when sales abruptly slowed and earnings crashed. Last quarter, Sequent reported earnings of 11 cents a share, down from 23 cents a share in the same quarter a year ago. For the current quarter, the company has predicted a "significant" decrease from last year's first-quarter earnings of 22 cents a share.As a result, "all the people on Wall Street who look short-term said they don't want to have anything to do with it," Mr. Seiver says. The stock plunged to below $10 a share from $34, before rebounding to yesterday's level of $16 in OTC trading. Mr. Seiver would pay as much as $19 or $20 for the shares, which he thinks "could be selling for $50 or $60" three to five years hence.For the coming six months, the pros' picks will compete against a Dartboard Portfolio consisting of Fifty Off Stores Inc., Republic Pictures Corp. Class B, Right Management Consultants Inc. and Synbiotics Corp.---Individual Investor magazineBUY: CLEARLY CANADIAN BEVERAGE CORP. (CLCDF)Kathleen MillardChase Manhattan BankBUY: EASTMAN KODAK CO. (EK)George JacobsenTrevor Stuart Burton andamp; JacobsenBUY: HUBBELL INC. CLASS B (HUBB)Daniel A. SeiverPAD System ReportBUY: SEQUENT COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC. (SQNT)**Four stocks picked by throw of darts: Chili's Inc., up 53.6%; Coachmen Industries Inc., up 2.6%; Schlumberger Ltd., down 1.6%; AmBase Corp., down 64.7%.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal