NEW YORK -- Nicholas Iannelli, two days old, whines softly as a nurse's aide takes him from his hospital bassinet and positions him beneath a big metal camera. "Come on, sweetheart," she whispers, then clicks the shutter.In a flash, Nicholas is back in the nursery, and his vital statistics embark on a lifelong journey into a vast network of direct-marketing computers.St. Vincent's Medical Center on Staten Island sends an order-card filled out by Nicholas's parents to the offices of First Foto in Red Bank, N.J. The Iannellis get snapshots. Their names, address and phone number go into the files of First Foto's owner, Hasco International Inc., whose hospital cameras shoot about 1.6 million newborns each year. The company passes along the data it collects to a Massachusetts outfit that does a brisk business sharing its lists with companies such as Kimberly-Clark Corp. and Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. They will fill the Iannellis' mailbox with ads for diapers and toys.Scavenging for the personal details of people's lives is today a high-tech, billion-dollar industry. It is the invisible engine of junk mail and junk phone calls. And it has been instrumental in the erosion of personal privacy.The industry has its tentacles in a thousand corners where personal information resides, from car registrations to mortgage records to birth announcements. It buys data from all manner of companies. Bookstores sell lists of their customers. Magazines and newspapers (including The Wall Street Journal) sell or rent their subscription lists. The industry also plucks data directly from consumers who don't always realize that they are feeding computers just by filling out questionnaires, entering contests, redeeming coupons or making a simple phone call."You go through life dropping little bits of data about yourself everywhere," says Evan Hendricks, editor of Privacy Times, a Washington, D.C., monthly. "Most people don't know that there are big vacuum cleaners sucking it up."Some people are upset by what they do know of all this. Last year, the software company Lotus Development Corp. attracted national attention to the personal-data business by announcing plans to sell "Marketplace," a set of personal-computer disks containing data on about 120 million U.S. households. That news brought Lotus lots of cards, letters and phone calls it didn't want -- 30,000 protests in all. In January, Lotus decided the product was more trouble than it was worth and killed it.Three committees of Congress plan hearings on the boom in personal data-gathering. A 1990 survey by onebig data-gatherer, Equifax Inc., concluded that nearly 80% of Americans are distressed about threats to their privacy.Nevertheless, fund-raisers and marketers have never been hungrier for tidbits of personal information. It is essential raw material for businesses shifting from mass-media advertising to direct-marketing via mail and phone. The strategy, which costs much more per targeted consumer, makes economic sense only when they know enough about a household to consider a personal pitch worthwhile.And companies know a staggering amount.Even if a baby happens to make it home from the hospital without landing in First Foto's database, the infant will still probably crawl into the files of Metromail Corp. of Lombard, Ill., one of the biggest of the information gatherers. The company promotes its "Young Family Index Plus," which lists 67,000 new births each week, about 85% of the 4.1 million babies born in the U.S. each year. Metromail babyfinders clip birth announcements, call Lamaze coaches and get names from companies that deal in baby supplies.The quest continues as children get older. A kid who reaches the 10th grade in school will almost certainly wind up in a computer in Great Neck, N.Y., where American List Corp. stores yearbook listings and other data about virtually every high-school class. Marketers also can get lists of 100,000 buyers of novelty items advertised on Dubble Bubble gum wrappers, and 73,467 members of the Dairy Queen Birthday Club. Another ice-cream club (Farrell's) in 1983 sold a list of 18-year-olds to the Selective Service System.Buy a house in any of 575 U.S. counties, and a Metromail agent will come into possession of public records on the sale and the mortgage. ("Be the first to know the `second' they close," is a Metromail slogan.) Buy a car in most states and the registration information (name, address, make), finds its way to R.L. Polk andamp; Co. of Detroit. (Among its many customers: The Wall Street Journal, which buys lists of new BMW and Mercedes-Benz owners from Polk.)Consumers Marketing Research Inc. of South Hackensack, N.J., sells lists sorted by any of 78 ethnic and religious groups. It produced a list of Italian voters for Mario Cuomo when he ran for governor of New York, black households for the United Negro College Fund, and Japanese men for a Brooks Brothers promotion of suits in smaller sizes. For a maker of lederhosen, CMR prepared a list of German names with those thought to be Jewish deleted.If anyone succumbs to too many of these pitches and files for personal bankruptcy protection, a scout for Jefferson Mailing Lists may well spot the court record. "It has turned out to be a tremendous list," says Jeff Figler, who runs the small Poway, Calif., firm and says it adds 35,000 names a month to its list. "They want to re-establish their credit, so when they buy something, they're going to be conscientious."Compiling and selling lists now profitably occupies thousands of little-known, mostly private companies. Since they usually sell lists for one use only, they can sell them again and again. (The buyer usually gets a roll of printed mailing labels to use once and is obliged not to duplicate or reuse the list without paying for it again.) With overhead low, they commonly enjoy 25% pretax profit margins. Tiny American List, which collects all the yearbooks, is spectacularly profitable, earning $4 million on $7.1 million in sales in fiscal 1990.But three companies dominate the industry, and they come from a long tradition of minding other people's business. Young Ralph L. Polk began knocking on doors in Ohio in the 1860s, for the publisher of a city directory. Twenty years later in Chicago, Reuben H. Donnelley started taking names and addresses for one of America's first phone books.Today R.L. Polk, still family-run, and Donnelley Marketing, owned by private investors, have built those early directories into electronic data bases that include nearly every household in America, with address, phone number, estimated income and information on purchasing habits, among other things. The third such nationwide file belongs to Metromail, owned by printing giant R.R. Donnelley andamp; Sons Co. (founded by Reuben's father but unrelated to Donnelley Marketing). Each of the three has estimated annual sales of between $150 million and $250 million.Government agencies do plenty to help the data-diggers, and sometimes share in the proceeds. New York state, which sells its car-registration data to the highest bidder, gets $1 million from Polk for two years' records.The data industry is a legal business. Privacy advocates have sought laws that would require companies to get a subject's permission before collecting or selling personal information. But the industry has successfully fought such moves, letting companies write their own loose rules. The industry trade group, the Direct Marketing Association, suggests that companies "periodically inform" people that their names are being sold, but the suggestion is easily and widely ignored.The federal Office of Thrift Supervision recently tried to curb the savings and loan industry's widespread practice of selling lists of depositors. But the regulators held off after the industry said cutting off list revenues could drive additional thrift institutions out of business.Movements are afoot in other nations to inform the public exactly how personal data bases work, and to give citizens the right to stay out of them. The European Community countries, for example, are preparing rules that would keep data subjects informed about how their names are used. Britain, Germany and several other countries have national agencies overseeing the uses of personal information.U.S. industry is largely unfettered by regulation and freewheeling in its practices. R.L. Polk searches its nationwide electronic file for listings in which the only name is a woman's, thus producing the "Polk's Female Head of Household List." Database America Cos. of Englewood, N.J., hunts for rich people by pinpointing neighbors of corporation directors.When dieters get coupons in the mail for Crystal Light drink mix and cash them in, few know that numbers on the coupons are matched to their own names in a computer at Kraft General Foods.Whatever effort is made to explain practices to consumers tends to appear in small print. On the baby-photograph order form that little Nicholas Iannelli's mother filled out, a line of type at the bottom declares: "If you prefer not to receive information on baby related items, check."Eleanor Iannelli didn't see that. "After you have a baby, you're in a daze -- some things you don't take notice of," she says. But soon after she brought Nicholas home, she got a flood of mail trying to sell her baby products. Mrs. Iannelli isn't sure where all these people got her name. She would have checked the First Foto box if she had seen it, she says.Not every consumer is singled out so precisely, and there have been embarrassing gaffes. Heart Thoughts Inc., which produces birth-announcement cards in Wichita, Kan., bought a list of pregnant women from a source it won't disclose. The names apparently came from a list of women who had said on a questionnaire that they intended to have a baby."We got calls and letters from quite a number of people who wanted to get pregnant but could not," recalls Woodrow W. Goodvin Jr., director of marketing. "In some cases they had been trying for years. We felt horrible about that," he says.The data-gathering business has attracted three sophisticated new entrants, who already know most Americans intimately. They produce credit reports.TRW Inc., Equifax, and Trans Union Corp. all have access to sensitive financial information about virtually every American. Banks, credit cards, stores and others send them regular updates about their customers. The three companies report on consumers' finances when they apply for a loan, a mortgage, a credit card or sometimes even a job.With the advent of the direct-marketing boom, the three companies realized they were sitting on a gold mine: a computerized directory containing not just the names and addresses of most people in America but also constantly updated, detailed information about what they have, what they buy and what they can afford. All three have aggressive divisions selling their data to marketers. So the next time you apply for a loan or a credit card, Equifax will probably include your name on its "Credit Seekers Hotline," ("a strong indicator that these prospects want to make new purchases").If you do start buying with that new Visa or MasterCard, you will probably show up on Trans Union's "Bankcard Hotline," which lists people who have used such a card recently. TRW sells a "Highly Affluent Consumer Database" of people with "proven individual and household income levels" over $100,000.Their new sideline puts the credit bureaus in the gray area of the federal Fair Credit Reporting Act, which generally forbids them to disclose data except for a "legitimate business need." The bureaus say they stay legal by not divulging specific data that would expose a consumer's financial condition to marketers. But they do use data to group consumers into broad categories such as high, average or low "spending power."Telephone companies are also getting into the business with the new technology they sell companies to trace phone calls, thus identifying callers by phone number.This can be a powerful data-mining tool. TV commercials recently promoted an 800 number one could call to learn the latest pollen count in any zip code. People by the thousand dialed the number. What they didn't know was that phone computers kept a record of every number that called. These were easily matched to names and addresses, all of which went to Warner-Lambert Co., which sent all these unsuspecting callers coupons for Benadryl antihistamine.Data vendors often play down the threat to privacy by arguing that their computers are used to generate mailing labels, not to look up facts about any one person. But that isn't always the case.The 775,000 PC hobbyists who subscribe to the CompuServe network can use a Metromail service called MetroNet. They type in your phone number and up comes your name, address, spouse, and more. Metromail's own customers can use personal computers to dial into MetroNet and find out the names and ages of all members of a household and the names, addresses and phone numbers of up to 10 neighbors.A Metromail phone-agent cheerfully demonstrated the service to this reporter, taking his phone number and, seconds later, reading off his address, wife's name, and the accurate information that he has lived in an apartment building of 20 to 49 units for three years. The agent also came up with a New York address for the rock star Madonna (in an 8-unit building), and she doesn't even have a listed telephone.Metromail promotes the service to bill-collectors, and says it also is "ideal" for "targeting customers' neighbors as new prospects for products/services."A company that wants to go after old people can do business with Senior Citizens Unlimited of White Plains, N.Y. It combs through driver's licenses and voter registrations to produce a data base of 40 million Americans over 50. Buyers get computer diskettes with 5,000 names, sorted by age, zip code, estimated income, and home ownership. The company calls senior citizens "ideal for telemarketing."James McQuaid, president of Metromail, says the company is "very cautious" about the data it includes in MetroNet. "What's in there is information that could be gathered publicly, though maybe not as easily," he says. Reverse directories sorted by phone number, for instance, have existed for decades.Like the credit-reporters and other data sellers, Metromail also says the industry is simply responding to consumers' growing demand for service and convenience. The Equifax survey found that many Americans say they oppose the sale of personal data, but change their minds once it is explained how the data can help people shop at home.Finally, the industry says it always deletes the records of anyone who asks out. Consumers who want their names purged from lists can contact the Direct Marketing Association in New York, which keeps a "delete me" list that mostbig datacompanies use. A million people have signed up for the list.But data firms say they sometimes simply ignore the list. One leading data executive says he actually helped a company send a special mailing to everyone on the "delete me" list, reasoning that their mailboxes would be wonderfully uncluttered.Lawmakers are trying to write rules for this industry. Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.) contends that selling credit-data to direct marketers is illegal, and he has introduced a bill that would make that ban more explicit. Another bill would establish a federal data protection board similar to agencies that exist in Europe.Meanwhile, the industry keeps thinking of new twists. It is even taking an interest in consumers who pass on from this marketplace. Lifestyle Change Communications Inc. of Atlanta, which prepares consumer questionnaires for marketers, often asks whether there has been a recent death in the family.Robert Perlstein, the company's president, says that question interests fund-raisers, credit-card companies, and landlords. "Death has always been a negative life style change nobody thought could be sold, but I differ," he says. "I think it's a very good market."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal