Until Friday, Electronic Data Systems Corp. looked to be on a roll, and its pending $4 billion deal with Continental Airlines Holdings Inc. was a big reason why.But Friday, EDS, thebig dataprocessing subsidiary of General Motors Corp., and Continental, the parent of troubled Eastern and Continental Airlines, abruptly canceled their complicated pact. The arrangement had promised EDS $4 billion in revenue over 10 years from managing the Eastern and Continental Airlines computer systems. EDS also was to get an entry into the lucrative business of processing airline reservations in return for paying Continental $250 million for a 50% share of Continental Holding's giant System One ticketing operation.The collapse of the EDS/System One transaction won't have any immediate effect on Continental Airlines. The sale of System One, and the $250 million in cash that would have provided, wouldn't have helped the immediate cash squeeze caused by skyrocketing fuel prices and a huge debt load. Continental Holdings had previously agreed to put the EDS cash in escrow pending negotiations with the creditors of Eastern Airlines.For EDS, however, the failure of the ambitious System One plan is an abrupt rainstorm at a time when the company was ready to hold a parade. The subsidiary's profits have been surging -- up 16% in the third quarter. A run of new contracts is flowing from a sweeping internal reorganization that freed middle managers to call their own shots. Chairman Lester M. Alberthal even donned goofy sunglasses to cavort in an MTV-style internal video to the lyrics: "The future's so bright, we've got to wear shades."Analysts had fretted for months that EDS executives were overconfident in the face of Eastern's bankruptcy proceedings and Continental's mounting problems. Eastern and Continental are System One's major customers. If they faltered, EDS stood to earn far less on its investment. To complicate matters, International Business Machines Corp.'s finance arm recently filed a lawsuit challenging aspects of the deal in a move to protect its financial stake in System One's computer hardware. (The suit was dropped last week when the deal broke down.)In the wake of the demise of the System One deal, analysts scrambled to cut 1991 profit estimates for EDS. Charles E. Taylor, Prudential-Bache Securities analyst, lowered his estimate to $2.30 a share from $2.40 a share, citing the breakup of the deal.The subsidiary's separately traded class of GM stock took a brief beating on the New York Stock Exchange, but then bounced back to close Friday at $33.375, down 12.5 cents. That close reflected the fact that losing the Continental deal was a setback, but not a disaster for EDS."Clearly, the revenue growth over the next 10 years will be less than we thought," says Montgomery Securities analyst David Bayer. Still, EDS has "plenty of new things in the hopper," and should see revenue grow 12% next year even without the System One deal, he says. Revenue in 1990 is expected to top $5 billion. That growth is a reflection of the broad effort Mr. Alberthal and his top managers have undertaken to make EDS more nimble, and more appealing to customers and employees alike."EDS has undergone more change in the last 24 months than we have in the last 10 years," Gary Fernandes, the senior vice president who oversees EDS's new corporate marketing operation, said in a recent interview. "I'm talking about structure, attitude, style and beliefs."In the fall of 1989, EDS broke its sales force into 39 "strategic business units," whose leaders have unprecedented leeway to pursue new business and sign deals on their own. Mr. Alberthal and eight other senior executives oversee the new business units as a sort of board of directors, but spend the bulk of their time charting broad corporate strategy.The object is to allow EDS's front-line managers more freedom to parry a growing army of competitors in the burgeoning market for computer systems management and design services, Mr. Alberthal says. Among them: IBM, Andersen Consulting, a unit of Arthur Andersen andamp; Co., and Perot Systems Corp., the company H. Ross Perot, EDS founder and former chairman, established two years ago.EDS business unit heads responded by producing a flock of computer systems management deals and marketing alliances with firms such as ASK Computer Systems Inc., a maker of specialized software for manufacturers.To reach out to even more customers, EDS is planning its first-ever corporate image advertising campaign. After the renowned Mr. Perot's bitter departure in 1986, EDS discovered that it was "invisible" to many potential clients, company executives said.But in its rush to expand, EDS is encountering an old bugaboo: its occasional propensity to underestimate the problems inherent in mastering unfamiliar businesses. Just a few days before the Continental deal collapsed, EDS quietly backed out of a separate deal to buy the parent of Ticor Title Insurance in a venture with Chicago investor Jay Pritzker when the preclosing examination of the troubled title insurance firm's finances turned up deeper problems than EDS had anticipated.Despite such reversals, however, EDS officials remain optimistic. They even hope to salvage something from their months of talks with Continental Holdings. But an EDS spokesman acknowledged that whatever EDS and Continental do next, "it will be a lot simpler, and we'll make sure it's nailed down from the beginning."---Bridget O'Brian contributed to this article.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal