On-line networks are so hot, you don't need a modem and password to know they have turned into a big business.Less clear, to the services' users and nonusers alike, are all the companies that can claim a piece of the on-line action, as well as who gets how big a slice for providing what service.Piles of money are being taken in by on-line networks, and by other businesses -- from magazines to modem makers -- that are plugging in to the demand in less obvious ways. The electronic-information industry's revenue totaled $11.6 billion in 1992 and is growing 14% annually, according to estimates from Yankee Group, a Boston research firm. By next year, the industry will top $15 billion. Those figures include oldfangled mainframe-to-mainframe data exchanges, but Yankee says two-thirds of the business is generated by people using computers to fetch information or interact with other computers.With 132 million personal computers in use world-wide and the networks for moving electronic information constantly improving, "the use of on-line services will explode by the end of the decade," says Jeff Leopold, an analyst at Yankee.Of course, the field is relatively young, and it's impossible to be sure exactly where and how the big money will be made a few years from now. Among the uncertainties: rapid growth in use of the Internet (the nonprofit "network of networks") and the Clinton administration's plans to forge an "information superhighway."The on-line industry had its roots in small, privately owned bulletin boards, which now number in the thousands. But it is evolving toward a more structured business with a few big mass-market services. Four leading commercial services alone account for four million users.Both big and small services allow customers to communicate with friends or fellow hobbyists, join discussions or download sample software programs. But the bigger networks -- including America Online Inc., CompuServe Inc., Prodigy Services Co. and GEnie -- offer a variety of other services, from shopping to travel arrangements to stock trades.The hottest company, though not the biggest, is Vienna, Va.-based America Online, whose subscriber base grew 60% to 350,000 in the year ended June 30. It mixes family-oriented and computer-hobbyist programs with cutting-edge forums where people can converse electronically. A White House connection puts users in touch with the nation's political nerve center. The rock band Depeche Mode went to America Online when it wanted a chat line to link it with its fans."Having such connections to the taste makers is critical," says Eric Arnum, editor of Electronic Mail andamp; Microsystems, an industry newsletter in Forest Hills, N.Y. "It's kind of like having Michael Jordan wearing your sneakers. It really matters."America Online's results show how important it is. Net income jumped 39% in fiscal 1993 to $3.1 million, while revenue rose 50% to $40 million. The company's shares have traded recently about five times higher than their initial public offering price of $11.50 in March 1992.CompuServe, owned by Handamp;R Block Inc., has 1.4 million subscribers, up 14% from 1992. It's geared more toward computer hobbyists, with offerings such as on-line chat services with software companies and Internet connections.CompuServe won't disclose profit figures, which Mr. Arnum of Electronic Mail says might be misleading anyway. Its revenue rose about 16% last year to $280 million, he says, but about half came from authorizations of Visa credit-card purchases, not from on-line services aimed at computer users. Jupiter Communications Inc., a New York research firm, estimates CompuServe has profit of $28 million a year from its consumer on-line services.Prodigy, a joint venture of International Business Machines Corp. and Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co., is the most family-oriented. While some boards allow obscenities on-line, Prodigy "is kind of a prudish service, very G-rated," Mr. Arnum says. It has one million subscribers, and analysts estimate its revenue at $200 million to $220 million last year (the company won't say).However, Prodigy isn't yet profitable. The reason: It has spent an estimated $800 million getting started, analysts say. And for years the company practically gave its service away, charging monthly fees of no more than $14.95, while not also charging users by the hour, as most other services do.That changed in July, when Prodigy adopted hourly fees of $3.60 to $4.80. Many users have since abandoned the service. The company says that fewer than 10% have left, and that the number of subscribers has already rebounded above its old level. A spokesman says membership is growing at "double-digit rates, and revenues are ahead of that figure." He adds that the fees will make Prodigy profitable in 1994.Mr. Arnum, however, says Prodigy isn't growing at double-digit anything. "They're flat," he says, "because of the new rates."GEnie, run by General Electric Co.'s Information Services unit, had 400,000 users last year and is at about the same level now. The problem, says Mr. Arnum, is that "it doesn't have a focus like the other services." He adds, "There are no adjectives like `family-oriented' attached to it." Instead, GEnie is a small company within abig data-transmission business that caters to the corporate market. John Barber, GEnie's general manager, says the company plans a big increase in marketing spending early next year, though he won't give details.GE doesn't break out GEnie's numbers, but a person close to the service says it has annual revenue of about $30 million. Earnings may be helped by a recent rate change: Like Prodigy, GEnie recently added hourly charges to its monthly fees. Jupiter estimated GEnie's profit before the rate change at about $10 million to $12 million a year.Then there's the Internet, the ad-hoc bunch of private and public networks that share a common computer code and backbone network. To the uninitiated user, Internet travel can be a difficult process, because the user must know the correct codes to find his or her way to the right database or electronic library. There are numerous companies that specialize in making this access easy.Still, everything that moves over networks connected by Internet codes travels at a fraction of the cost of traditional carriers. That's due partly to a subsidy from the federal government. Access is also cheap because institutions pay a flat fee and there is no charge per message, though in some cases there is a minimal hourly charge for being hooked up to the network.People who want to buy products, enter an "electronic community" or search a database don't have to do so through Prodigy, CompuServe or some other commercial service. If they know the right codes, they can enter an Internet address and gain direct access to the service of their choice."The only thing the big services have over the Internet is more phone lines coming into them, a $10-an-hour fee and an entry-level user interface," says Michael Sussel, an independent bulletinboard operator in New York. "Any idiot can get onto CompuServe or Prodigy and move in a slow, methodical fashion that incidentally costs them more money in on-line time charges."While the mass-market on-line services are the most visible, there's still plenty of room for small, entrepreneurial bulletin boards, whose numbers have grown to 13,000 in the U.S. from a few hundred in the early 1980s. Fees for access to boards vary widely: Some are free, and some charge more than $100 a year for a subscription that lets users into the service anytime after they punch in a password.Many bulletin boards are home-based businesses that use a powerful IBM-compatible personal computer, modems and many phone lines to take incoming calls. Mr. Sussel, the New York system operator, and his wife, Kathy, run a board called the Invention Factory out of their New York loft. A former inventor of children's toys that glow in the dark, Mr. Sussel at first bought his computer and modem to read bulletin boards and to try out and trade programs with other users.His hobby quickly got too expensive. In 1984, the Sussels turned it into a business. Today the Invention Factory has 3,200 subscribers, from kids looking for games to businesses seeking new software for old tasks like accounting. Fees range from $25 a year for one hour of use and 1.2 megabytes of software downloads a day to $150 a year for three hours of use and 3.6 megabytes of downloading a day on higher-speed lines.Mr. Sussel estimates that the board takes in about $200,000 a year. But that's before expenses, which include part of the Sussel's rent, electricity (to run his bank of computers, modems and other computer peripherals) and monthly phone charges (for 24 phone lines).New York's high tax rate is another drain on the Invention Factory's net income: New York state charges a 5% "modem" tax on information delivered electronically, in addition to its regular sales tax of 8.25%. "We're lucky if we take home $40,000 at the end of the year," Mr. Sussel says. "We're not rich, but we live where we work, and nobody can fire us."Bulletin boards aren't the only operations making a business of the on-line business. Many catalog companies, like Lands' End Inc., sell their products on-line, either directly or through the big bulletin boards, as an adjunct to their main operations.Other businesses rely on electronic sales, including Noteworthy Music in Nashua, N.H., which sells music on compact disk at a steep discount through GEnie. Coffee Anyone? in San Francisco, sells coffee beans, ground coffee and gourmet treats such as cakes.PCFlowers, available on Prodigy, has become one of the top five sellers of flowers through FTD in less than four years. "This year we'll do $10 million" in sales, up from $1 million in 1990, says William J. Tobin, a co-founder of the Stamford, Conn., company. And that's with just seven employees. "I'm told we have the highest profit margin of any company in the country, except for a drug dealer," he says.The bigger on-line networks get part of their revenue from commissions on such services. None of the big networks will discuss their commissions. But at Prodigy they can range from 5% on low-margin items like software and videotapes to 50% on clothing and flowers, says Lisa Johnson, an analyst at Link Resources Inc., a New York research firm that follows the computer and communications industries. CompuServe charges 2% on all products, Ms. Johnson says. GEnie and America Online have much smaller shopping services and negotiate different commissions with each seller.Companies that help consumers hook up to the networks are also benefiting from the on-line boom. One growing business: providing access to the Internet, which was built to link large computers and users connected to them. Performance Systems International Inc. in Herndon, Va., and SprintLink, a service of Sprint Corp., Westwood, Kan., between them control 75% to 80% of the $20 million market in providing Internet gateways to companies and institutions, says Electronic Mail's Mr. Arnum. He expects the market to double in the next year. American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. recently announced it will provide its corporate customers with complete access to the Internet. Full Internet access can cost as much as $65,000 a year, plus the expense of dedicated phone lines.For hobbyists and consumers, the big on-line services and other companies provide limited dial-up access to the Internet from computers at home. These services cost $1 to $10 an hour, depending on how extensive the access is; none allow the massive file transfers and downloads that institutional users can get.CerfNet, a San Diego-based division of General Atomics Corp., takes in $3 million a year from serving both large users and individuals. Its basic hourly service costs $20 a month plus $3 to $10 per hour on-line. Other small access providers include Software Tool andamp; Die, Brookline, Mass.; and Portal Communications, Cupertino, Calif.Companies that provide some of the plugs and wires of on-line connections are seeing strong growth. While the computer industry languishes, the modem industry took in $1.2 billion last year and is expanding more than 10% annually.U.S. Robotics Inc. in Skokie, Ill., had revenue of $112.4 million in the year ended Oct. 31, 1992, nearly triple that of two years earlier. Earnings in the same period jumped sixfold to $1 a share. In the third quarter, ended July 31, the company's net income shot up 58% to $4.5 million, as revenue surged 69% to $48.2 million.Similarly, Data Race Inc. in San Antonio saw profit and revenue more than double in the fiscal year ended June 30, to $4.9 million and $43.9 million, respectively. Figures aren't available for the two biggest modem makers, closely held Hayes Microcomputer Products Inc. and Motorola Inc.'s Codex Corp.Bulletin boards also have created a market in specialized software needed to run the systems. Most boards rely on one of four companies: Clark Development Co. in Murray, Utah; Mustang Software Inc., Bakersfield, Calif.; Galacticomm Inc., Fort Lauderdale, Fla.; and eSoft Inc., Aurora, Colo.The industry is small, with total revenue of $20 million. Fred Clark, who started and runs Clark Development, says his company has 20% to 25% of the market. Sales, mainly to smaller bulletin boards, have climbed more than 25% a year since 1986, and he now has 11 employees.Is the company profitable? "We're completely self-funded," Mr. Clark says. "No debt. We don't owe money to a soul. And we have money in the bank. But I won't say how much."On-line action also generates business for local phone companies, long-distance carriers such as ATandamp;T and MCI Communications Corp., and data networks such as Sprint's SprintNet and British Telecommunication PLC's Tymnet. Yankee Group estimates world-wide revenue for data networks at $4.6 billion and says it is growing 13% a year."Voice traffic still pays the bills, but data is the fastest-growing market," says Dale Williams, assistant vice president of Sprint's data business. "This data-market traffic is growing four times faster than voice."The rise of on-line communications is even creating opportunities in an older information technology. Jack Rickard, previously a technical writer, started Boardwatch magazine in Littleton, Colo., six years ago as a guide to on-line services. His magazine had 150 subscribers in the first year; now it has 14,000, and it sells 54,000 copies a month on newsstands.Mr. Rickard, who drives an old Volkswagen bus, says he doesn't know how much he makes from the magazine, "but I have a wife and four kids, and they all seem to be well fed."The magazine recently asked readers how many calls a month they make to bulletin boards. More than 20,000 people responded; their average was 62 calls a month. Says Mr. Rickard, "They're literally living on-line."---Mr. Keller is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau.