CAMBRIDGE, Mass. -- George Conrades, a former senior vice president at International Business Machines Corp. who was shoved aside in a management shake-up in 1991, has been hired to rejuvenate Bolt Beranek andamp; Newman Inc.Mr. Conrades, 54 years old, was named president and chief executive officer of Bolt Beranek, succeeding Stephen R. Levy, who will remain chairman.At IBM, Mr. Conrades was known for his marketing prowess and ability to motivate employees -- characteristics that will be much in demand at Bolt Beranek, which has incurred layoffs and losses as customers in the the military and federal agencies have cut spending.One major challenge for Mr. Conrades is to broaden the company's revenue sources. After establishing itself as a pioneering high-technology company that specializes in packet-switching data communication, Bolt Beranek now relies on government contracts for about two-thirds of its revenue -- mainly in research and computer and acoustic systems design.An upbeat Mr. Conrades says he sees opportunities in a number of new Bolt Beranek technologies aimed at improving the way people and computers communicate -- including a high-speed computer switching device and software for making pictures from numerical data. By expanding into such areas, Bolt Beranek "will have kind of a new pan in which to prepare our meals," says Mr. Conrades.The company's net loss for the fiscal year ended June 30 was $32.3 million, or $2.05 a share, compared with a profit of $7.8 million, or 46 cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue fell 9.5% to $233.5 million from $258 million in fiscal 1992.Mr. Conrades earned a reputation as a sharp marketer by helping turn around IBM's Asian operations. In 1991, as a senior vice president, he was a candidate for the company's chairmanship until he was pushed aside in a surprisingly public move by then-chairman John Akers. Mr. Conrades landed in a less powerful position with limited staff and duties and left the company a few months later. Many IBM insiders felt he was unfairly victimized for Mr. Akers's own failings.Bolt Beranek officials are betting that Mr. Conrades can find new customers for technologies that are promising but haven't yet generated big sales.Mr. Levy, 53, who is stepping down as Bolt Beranek's top executive, said he wasn't asked to move aside. "This was entirely initiated by me," he said. "I've been chief executive officer for 17 years. There aren't too many people I would step aside for."John Logan, executive vice president of the Aberdeen Group Inc., a market research and consulting company in Boston, applauded the move."Fantastic," Mr. Logan said. "BBN is a terrific technological" company. "And Conrades is the kind of person who can take that knowledge to the marketplace," Mr. Logan said."He knows what thebig datacenters need, how they need it supplied and through what channels."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal