NEW YORK -- International Business Machines Corp.'s first-quarter net income more than tripled as sales rose in all product lines, a stronger-than-expected showing that sent the computer maker's stock price higher.The earnings and revenue were first-quarter records, as revenue jumped 18%. IBM shares traded in unusually high volumes and briefly broke the $90 mark yesterday as investors exulted."It's amazing," said Steve Milunovich, an analyst at Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. "It's like a return to the glory days." The results prompted analysts to boost their earnings projections for the rest of the year, while IBM stock rose $1.875 a share to $89 in consolidated New York Stock Exchange trading.IBM said it earned $1.29 billion, or $2.12 a share, up from $392 million, or 64 cents a share, in the year-earlier quarter, when net income included $56 million, or 10 cents a share, from IBM's Federal Systems unit, which it sold in March 1994. Revenue rose to $15.7 billion from $13.4 billion.But about a third of the revenue growth came from translating IBM's foreign sales into the weak dollar, while profit received a currency boost of about 14 cents a share. The quarter also benefited from an easy comparison with the weak year-earlier results. Moreover, IBM executives warned that such dramatic revenue and earnings improvements may not be possible the rest of the year as the company continues its revamping and the economy slows, as current signs indicate.Still, IBM generated a huge amount of cash in the quarter. Its cash holding remained at about $10.5 billion despite spending $1.4 billion on stock buybacks designed to boost earnings per share. While Jerome York, IBM's chief financial officer, previously raised the possibility that the company would make a major acquisition with the cash, he appeared to play down the idea yesterday. "There's no King Kong acquisition on the horizon right now," he told analysts, adding that IBM was looking at only "small things.""In the first quarter we had more cylinders firing than perhaps we've had in recent quarters," Mr. York added. "We wouldn't want to guarantee that it will continue. We have many things left to do."While all IBM's product lines recorded higher sales, problem areas remain. The company said that its struggling personal-computer division shipped more than one million units in the first quarter, a record, but that the division still hasn't turned the corner. Analysts believe the unit, which had a stunning loss of $1 billion last year before taxes, continues to run in the red.Mr. York told analysts that the PC unit ran into trouble when it started producing more than three million computers a year. The unit's parts procurement, manufacturing and shipping systems, designed for lower-volume production in other IBM units, couldn't handle the capacity. That resulted in shortages of popular products. "We have a massive program to revamp this but it will probably take over a year to get it all done," he said.Overall, IBM's computer-hardware revenue soared 23% to $7.7 billion in the quarter. Analysts said the sales were boosted in part by demand for mainframe computers, which have been sold out for months. Some of the mainframe sales the company typically would have recorded in the historically strong fourth quarter probably spilled over into the first quarter due to the backlog.But some observers wonder how long this mainframe surge will last. Some of the demand came from customers that were reluctant to order the big, multimillion-dollar machines a few years ago when they started to fall out of fashion. Now, with the pickup in the economy, big mainframe users can't hold back any longer on new orders. Mr. York predicts mainframe revenue will be down for the entire year, but he won't say by how much.In addition, Mr. York said IBM still must eliminate an additional $1.5 billion in expenses to reach its goal of an $8 billion annual cost reduction by mid-1996. IBM's overall gross profit margin edged up to 42.4% from 39.2% in the year-earlier quarter, after adjusting for $296 million in one-time charges taken in the 1994 period. Expenses fell 3.4% in the quarter after adjusting for the weak dollar, and would have fallen an even better 7.9% without the dollar's decline.Still, even troubled areas saw gains in the quarter. In the company's lagging disk-drive division, revenue from sales of hard drives to other computer makers rose 50%, while customer shipments ofbig data-storage devices used by mainframes and minicomputers doubled in terms of total storage capacity.Mr. York had specifically cited the disk-drive and PC units as trouble spots when he announced IBM's fourth-quarter earnings in January. Yesterday, he said progress has been such that the two units accounted for about 20% of the profit rise in the first quarter.IBM's personal-computer software unit also registered improvements, Mr. York said. The unit sold 1.1 million copies of its OS/2 Warp product in the quarter, for a total OS/2 installed base of more than nine million."We are gaining market share," Mr. York said. But IBM's heavy advertising and marketing costs probably exceed OS/2 revenue, and the product remains in an uphill battle with Microsoft Corp.'s far more popular Windows product, which has a total installed base of more than 60 million.Overall software sales rose 11% to $2.9 billion, with about two-thirds of this coming from mainframe software. Revenue from computer services, such as operating computer rooms for customers, climbed 33% to $2.4 billion."It was clearly a very strong quarter," said Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. analyst Barry Willman. "Most businesses moved in the right direction. The key question is where do we go from here."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal