Skybridge LP, a $4 billion satellite project that plans to offer high-speed Internet and video services, has signed up Australia's Telstra Corp. to provide Skybridge's services in Australia, New Zealand and Southeast Asia.Telstra would likely take an equity stake in the venture as part of the agreement in principle, said Skybridge's chief executive. The agreement, expected to be announced today, is expected to close by September.If Skybridge, headquartered in Bethesda, Md., and majority owned by Alcatel SA of France, can quickly sign up this and other service providers, the company could gain an early edge over competing broadband satellite projects from General Motors Corp.'s Hughes Electronics, Lockheed Martin Corp. and Teledesic LLC.Skybridge proposes to offer broadband services through 80 low earth-orbit satellites starting in 2002 and serving some 20 million users by 2007. It would offer connections to homes and offices through small satellite dishes, and link with providers through bigger earth stations.Besides Alcatel, investors include Loral Space andamp; Communications Ltd., Canada's COM DEV International Ltd. and Japan's Mitsubishi Electric Corp. Loral, which owns a 20% stake in Skybridge, plans to co-market the Skybridge service with its own Cyberstar broadband service, which is testing commercial services to a few thousand users in North America. Alcatel owns 14% of Cyberstar. Cyberstar uses a larger geostationary satellite forbig datahauls, while low-orbit networks like Skybridge are better suited for things like videoconferencing or interactive games.For Telstra, the Australian national carrier that is being privatized, the agreement with Skybridge fits the company's plans to grow internationally through alliances and bilateral agreements.Pascale Sourisse, president and chief executive officer of Skybridge, said Telstra's equity investment is part of a plan to complete a second round of investment in Skybridge through service providers. "We plan to have 40% of the project through equity investors," she said. Ms. Sourisse wouldn't say how much Telstra was planning to invest in Skybridge, nor would she identify which other service providers her company was talking with. Other investment, she said, would come from an initial public offering and a debt offering planned for 2001.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal