NEW YORK -- International Business Machines Corp. is promoting two well-regarded executives to the company's corporate executive committee, including only the second woman in Big Blue's history to enter this elite, male-dominated cadre of decision makers.That executive, Abby Kohnstamm, the new senior vice president of corporate marketing, is credited with conceiving an image makeover for the IBM brand, turning a dull, almost passe company into a hip advertiser with critically acclaimed messages that seem to play well in a world dominated by the Internet.Also becoming a senior vice president and committee member is James Vanderslice, who will head the technology group, a new organization focused on expanding IBM's sales to other companies in areas such as computer chips, disk drives, large printers and liquid-crystal display screens. This activity already generates about $7 billion in annual revenue -- or about 9% of IBM's 1997 sales of $78.5 billion -- and has been growing at a 44% annual rate, but it has been spread over several units.Both appointments, effective Oct. 1, were disclosed yesterday in an internal memo to IBM employees from IBM's chairman and chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner Jr.As a member of the executive committee, Ms. Kohnstamm joins 12 other executives, all men, who set strategic direction and manage IBM. The daughter of a former IBM advertising manager, Ms. Kohnstamm is a relative newcomer to the Armonk, N.Y., company, having joined in 1993.Her elevation comes at a critical time for IBM, which is shooting for faster growth after struggling to boost revenue in recent years. In an interview, Ms. Kohnstamm acknowledged that "certainly we haven't had home runs across the board." But, noting that IBM is a "big, diverse company," she said that "there are a number of areas where there has been demonstrable growth in market share and mind share."Ms. Kohnstamm has been a behind-the-scenes but influential executive in the world of technology advertising, not only because of IBM's name recognition but to its $1.7 billion annual ad, sales and promotional budget. The only other woman at IBM named to this group, formerly called the management committee, was Ellen Hancock, who left IBM in 1995 and is now chief executive officer of a small Internetservice company.While the 44-year-old Ms. Kohnstamm was already among the very few senior woman executives at IBM, she previously shared the stage with others, such as Linda Sanford, who heads the large global industries sales unit. Ms. Kohnstamm's elevation to the executive committee formalizes her role as the company's top-ranked woman and underscores that she has the confidence of Mr. Gerstner. Both also were colleagues at American Express Co.Ms. Kohnstamm played down the significance of being the only woman on the committee, noting that while she has had a "kind of informal seat at the [committee] table, it is nice to now have a formal seat." In his memo, Mr. Gerstner said simply that "Abby has been in the forefront of all our marketing achievements," adding that "marketing capability and marketing resources are critical in so many ways to the future of our company."At IBM, Ms. Kohnstamm has pushed for major consolidation of its marketing and advertising agencies. In 1994, IBM surprised Madison Avenue by eliminating its relationships with nearly 80 agencies, moving all its work to WPP Group's Ogilvy andamp; Mather Worldwide. IBM has since done the same in market research and promotions, and is planning to do so with its interactive agencies.Ms. Kohnstamm acknowledged that the moves saved money but emphasized that they also brought a rigor to measuring the value of IBM's spending. That led IBM to end its participation in high-profile events, including the Olympics and Comdex, the annual computer-industry meeting in Las Vegas. "I do not subscribe to the theory that everything before 1993 was awful," she said, speaking of her arrival at IBM. "But we have had a real improvement in marketplace perception about the company. And we have plenty more to do."With the promotion of Mr. Vanderslice, Mr. Gerstner is rewarding an executive who has aggressively turned one of IBM's worst-performing units-storage systems -- into a technology leader that is now a dominant player in the market for personal-computer hard drives.Mr. Vanderslice moved production to low-cost countries and shifted the unit's focus from making drives for large computers to those used in PCs. That positioned IBM to reap the benefits of a recent boom in demand for storage, lifting Mr. Vanderslice's profile within IBM.The 58-year-old executive, however, has had limited success in other areas. IBM is well behind EMC Corp. inbig data-storage systems used by large computers, and its network hardware business is nowhere close to catching up with nimbler rivals such as Cisco Systems Inc. The other unit under Mr. Vanderslice -- printing systems -- is on the shopping block.A 32-year IBM veteran, Mr. Vanderslice insisted that the network-hardware division will start improving as new products take hold. As with the storage business, "you will start to see a turnaround 18 months down the road," he said. "I have had the [network hardware] division a year."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal