It's official: Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. has unveiled a radical new Internet-brokerage strategy, one of the boldest moves in its 85-year history.The nation's largest full-service securities firm, confirming a report in The Wall Street Journal, will offer online trading for as little as $29.95 a trade. Currently, Merrill customers pay commissions of as much as several hundred dollars a transaction."It really got to the point where we all felt the viability of that segment of the market was indisputable," said David Komansky, Merrill's chairman.Now Merrill has to make the plan work. To do this, the firm must essentially build a large-scale, discount-trading operation. That won't be easy: Within months, Merrill has to streamline and add key features to its computer systems, hire hundreds of technical staff and expand its existing customer-service centers. And computer glitches have repeatedly bedeviled some of Merrill's most sophisticated online-trading rivals.Moreover, by announcing the ambitious plan six months before the launch date -- Dec. 1 for the discount Internet account, which features Web and telephone trading for the cut-rate fees -- Merrill has tipped its hand and given competitors the chance to catch up. Other traditional brokers could race to match Merrill's offering, analysts say, and companies that already have a big presence on the Web could add services to snare new investors before Merrill can appeal to them.For now, however, the pressing question is: Can Merrill meet its target date?"Their track record of hitting deadlines isn't exactly the best when it comes to offering online trades," says Bill Burnham, who follows electronic commerce for Credit Suisse First Boston Corp. In the past two years, Merrill delayed the launch of its very limited Web-trading system at least three times.Still, Merrill had little choice but to act now. That's because each day it waited would be another in which assets could migrate to online-trading rivals. Julio Gomez, who runs the Gomez Advisors Internet consulting firm in Concord, Mass., said: "This is their way of telling their customers to hang in there."So Merrill's technology department, under the direction of Senior Vice President Howard Sorgen, will now scramble to put the new systems in place. Currently, only about 1% of Merrill's more than five million customers are eligible to trade online. But the firm has to be ready for a big increase by July 12, when thousands of customers are expected to switch to a new fee-based account that offers unlimited online and offline trading. That account is separate from the discounted, $29.95 option.All traditional Wall Street firms have recently struggled to overhaul their older computer systems. The fact is, they aren't designed to pull data from different parts of the firm and present them to customers over a Web site, notes Simon Moss, the head of the International Business Machines Corp. unit that provides consulting and other services to financial firms.But in the past year or two, Merrill has worked to streamline its systems to link different departments. These units previously worked on totally separate systems, says Merrill's Mr. Sorgen. That has allowed the firm to offer limited trading, which is integrated with a Web site stocked with features such as stock quotes and research reports. More than 450,000 Merrill customers now access the site.But Merrill has to develop systems to let customers open accounts online without a broker and get account updates immediately after they trade -- something not offered now. The firm also expects to hire about 600 to 800 technical staff in the next 18 months. Still, Merrill may wind up hiring an outside firm to actually "host," or run the front end, of its discount-trading Web site, Mr. Sorgen adds.Merrill already has twobig"datacenters" housing key computer databases in Manhattan and Staten Island, N.Y., but may expand its service centers in Denver and Somerset, N.J., to house new personnel for its discount service, Mr. Sorgen says. For more than a year, Merrill has been offering full-price trading services over the phone with brokers housed at the Somerset facility, which is now servicing about 100,000 customers, Merrill officials say. The firm says it will be ready by Dec. 1. "There's no going back," Mr. Sorgen says.The $825 million rollout of the firm's new broker "workstation" in the past three years also encountered problems. Merrill had to switch, halfway through, to an Internet-based model from an intranet one. Now, however, all the firm's 14,800 brokers have access to the new system, officials say."We have some issues," concedes Maddy Weinstein, a senior vice president in Merrill's individual-investor group. "There's some more work to be done" on the new Internet-trading platform.In October, Merrill also went outside the company to hire John A. McKinley, formerly with General Electric Co.'s GE Capital Corp., as its chief technology officer. Merrill's internal preparations in the last year, plus its acquisition of the online-brokerage-technology arm of D.E. Shaw andamp; Co. in February, mean "we certainly could be in the marketplace very soon with the offering," Ms. Weinstein said.For Merrill, the issue now is less what it is doing than how well it does it. "Execution is everything," says Richard Strauss, an analyst with Goldman Sachs Group Inc. "It's going to be a long time before anyone can just snap their fingers and say, `Boom, the execution is there.' There's a learning curve here."---Journal Link: Join an online discussion about Merrill Lynch's venture into the Internet-trading arena in The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition at http://wsj.com(See related article: Brokers Jittery Over Their Pay" -- WSJ June 2, 1999)Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal