It looks like the Y2K bug still has some bite left.In the past week, phrases such as "Y2K uncertainties" have popped up in earnings warnings from Lexmark International, Xerox and Unisys. The stocks of all three companies took a shellacking: Yesterday, the stock of Lexmark, a printer company and former IBM division, plunged $28 to close at $65. Xerox stock dropped $3.625 to close at $23.8125, down from more than $40 two weeks ago. Unisys closed off $1.875 at $23, down from $42.25 before it reported earnings last week. All these stocks trade on the New York Stock Exchange.For all three companies, concern about the millennium bug -- the glitch that prevents some computers and software from recognizing the year 2000 -- wasn't the primary factor in revenue or earnings disappointments they announced."But it was a factor in all three cases," says Steven Milunovich, a computer analyst and manager of tech research at Merrill Lynch.Investors' expectations about technology spending leading up to the year 2000 have run to extremes. Late last year, there was fearful talk of a "nuclear winter," meaning that spending on technology would disappear entirely as companies braced for the transition to the new millennium. Then, in the spring, as orders continued to roll in, tech stocks soared, and investors bid up prices in expectations of growing earnings in the year 2000.To be sure, many analysts and money managers still consider the year-2000 bug a minor matter -- or a handy excuse to be trotted out by stumbling management. It's like "El Nino, or the dog ate my homework," says Charles Phillips, an analyst covering e-commerce and enterprise software at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter.He believes the use of Y2K as an excuse for poor earnings "will be very widespread." But he doesn't see any sign of a real business slowdown: "The great majority of companies in my sector are hitting their numbers."Several money managers point to Sun Microsystems as an example of a company that hasn't run into any problems with Y2K. Sun's earnings report last week "was very strong, and its backlog was up tremendously," says William Keithler, manager of the $2.7 billion Invesco Technology Fund.But some investors say the millennium bug is having more of an impact than Wall Street expected even a month ago. "The nuclear-winter scenario isn't playing out," but at some companies there is a slowdown, Mr. Milunovich says.Nuclear autumn, perhaps?For a weather vane, investors are looking ahead this week to earnings announcements by technology companies -- and especially tomorrow's expected earnings announcement from International Business Machines. Again and again, investors say that IBM should be an important indicator of the effect of any Y2K spending slowdown."The nextbig datapoint is IBM," says Invesco Technology's Mr. Keithler. "They touch so much that if there's something going on, they'll see something." Mr. Keithler doesn't expect to see a general slowdown in technology spending due to Y2K, and he notes that IBM hasn't said it's encountering any problems so far. But he is concerned enough to be on the lookout: "It will definitely be an important thing to watch."It's not easy diagnosing whether a company's troubles are Y2K-related, says Chip Morris, manager of $7 billion T. Rowe Price Science and Technology Fund. "How do you separate bad execution from Y2K spending overhang from weaker corporate business spending?" To confuse things further, "It is a convenient excuse: The Y2K bogeyman stole my sales."Mr. Morris, who is also wondering what will come out of IBM's report, says that over the past month he has been thinning out the number of stocks in his fund's portfolio. He is trying "to consolidate our ownership positions in thoroughbred, highly liquid companies that we think have the best fundamentals. We're not that naive to assume none of them have Y2K issues. But we hope the degree of Y2K impact is less than others."Among hardware companies, EMC looks relatively safe to him. Among Internet companies, he reckons that larger companies such as Yahoo! and America Online could weather a Y2K-related spending slowdown better than smaller companies such as Sportsline USA or iVillage.Brent Jesko, associate manager of the $2.2 billion Strong Opportunity Fund, says the portfolio is now slightly underweight in technology stocks, mostly out of concern of high valuations, but partly also out of concern over Y2K risks. While he deems those risks small, "that small risk becomes a bigger issue because of the high valuations."Stocks in the fund that still look good at current prices, Mr. Jesko says, include American Power Conversion, which makes power-backup devices for server computers, and Parametric Technology, which makes computer-aided design software. Stocks the fund has sold include KLA-Tencor, which makes semiconductor equipment, and Intel, the giant microprocessor maker. His concerns over Intel have to do with the stock's still-lofty price, despite its recent decline, and the growth of less-profitable, lower-end processors.Mr. Jesko remains cautiously optimistic on Y2K. The problem hasn't shown up yet in most companies' earnings reports. But he notes that those companies saying they will do a "lockdown" of their information technology departments -- forbidding any further additions of equipment or software until the new millennium -- planned to freeze spending on Oct. 1 or later. "I'm expecting the fourth quarter to be the white-of-the-eyes testing time for Y2K."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal