Small investors might not have much chance of getting in on the hottest initial public stock offerings, but they have more and more IPO information at their fingertips these days, courtesy of the Internet.Of course, investors can always phone underwriters for prospectuses on offerings they care about, provided they know what deals are happening and the underwriters have prospectuses on hand. But an informed on-line IPO sleuth can use the Internet to learn which companies are slated to go public, who's taking them public, and other basic information. Then, they can get as much or as little information as they want on the companies, usually in far less time than it takes the mail.Like everything on the Internet, the quality of the on-line IPO data varies from comprehensive to skimpy, from free to patently overpriced.But on-line aficionados have pinpointed several sites that house useful information about companies going, or just, gone public. The following selections -- an incomplete list to be sure -- range from the Securities and Exchange Commission's ugly-but-utterly-comprehensive Edgar database of all corporate filings to commercial services that serve up dressed-up Edgar data for a fee. Other services also offer selected free summaries of the latest IPO offerings from outfits like corporate researchers Hoover's Inc.Any investor should know about Edgar, the acronym for the SEC's Electronic Data Gathering Analysis and Retrieval system, whose Internet address is www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm. For IPO information, click on "Search the Edgar archives," or "Custom filing retrieval tools." Then type in the name of a company that has registered to go public. That will turn up a list of all the electronically filed documents by that company, which investors can call up with the click of a mouse.Unfortunately, the SEC doesn't specify which filings are IPO registrations. Investors should look for documents labeled "S-1," which is the initial document most companies file indicating their intent to go public. (S-1s are also used by companies to register to issue additional shares of stock.) If the company has been in registration for a while, investors should look for the latest S-1/A, which is the amended S-1 companies must file if they make changes to their registration at the request of the SEC or on their own. Smaller companies will file an SB-2 or SB-2/A. After an IPO is priced, investors can find the final prospectus labeled 424 B. (Other less-common filings that could be for an IPO include SB-1s or S-11s for real-estate investment trusts, or REITs.)Investors can't tap right into Edgar the minute a company files one of these documents, because the SEC's raw data are always delayed for 24 hours to give commercial vendors that purchase Edgar data for resale a competitive edge.Sometimes Edgar can resemble abig datadump, full of great information but also containing tedious exhibits giving dry lawyerly details of a deal. For a fee, some subscription services provide snappier versions of Edgar data. One such vendor is Smart Edgar (www.smartedgar.com), which costs from $19.95 to $39.95 a month to download 10 or more filings and provide alerts on a certain number of filings designated by the investor ahead of time. Livedgar (www.gsionline.com) is another such service where investors can download software that helps them search Edgar for a list of IPO-specific filings, for a minimum of $10 per use plus $1 a minute.Edgar Online, (www.edgaronline.com) costs from $9.95 to nearly $100 a month for five or more company reports and an equal number of alerts. Edgar Online is also linked to a helpful site that gives investors a free list of all SEC filings for the day. From that list, surfers can get a brief summary of the company, if available, written by Hoover's, including the issuer's address, phone number, officials, number of employees, some sales data, type of company and proposed stock symbol. Investors can also get a free Market Guide's Company Snapshot Report as well as PR Newswire releases on the company.Another helpful site that may not stay free for long is IPO Central (www.ipocentral.com), which is jointly maintained by Hoover's and Edgar Online. Investors can click on the name of a recently filed or offered IPO and get a Hoover's summary of the company, plus a free copy of the S-1 or other documents from Edgar Online. IPO Central's list of current IPOs is updated more frequently than some of the other free sites. A spokeswoman says IPO Central may begin charging for some of the site's information within a few months.A similar but less-comprehensive free site is Wall Street Net (www.netresource.com/wsn), which has skeletal information on both "Done Deals" or "Deals in Registration." The data, currently updated weekly, will soon be updated daily, a spokesman says. Investors can jump from Wall Street Net's IPO site to the SEC's Edgar database.There are plenty of free on-line spots for basic summaries of companies that have filed to go public or have gone public recently. One fairly comprehensive site is IPO Data Systems (www.ipodata.com), which provides free company profiles of many 1996 IPOs, including such data as underwriters, company business description, use of proceeds, filing information like the pricing range and the number of shares, and the phone number of the lead underwriter. It also links investors to Edgar.Another slick spot is Montgomery Securities' web site at www.montgomery.com. Montgomery, one of the most active IPO underwriters, recently began posting on its web site the final prospectuses for companies it has underwritten, something few other major firms do. Montgomery posts the prospectus within three days of the offering, and is considering posting preliminary prospectuses, known as red herrings, on their site in the future.For those IPO nuts who can't get enough e-mail, Alert IPO (www.ostman.com/alert-ipo) will send daily emails, for $34.95 a year, with key points from all IPO-related SEC filings, generally within 24 or 48 hours of the filing. Alert IPO also posts for free a weekly list of new SEC IPO filings.To find other IPO-specific sites, the adventurous can search the Web under the word "IPOs" to find sites like www.ipomonitor.com and www.ipo-source.com and www.prospex.com.---Friday's Market ActivitySmall-cap stocks fell, underperforming the broad market and blue chips.The Russell 2000 index of small-cap stocks fell 0.36 to 347.85. The Nasdaq composite at 1242.48, rose 0.52. For the week, the Russell 2000 edged lower by 0.04, or 0.01%, and the Nasdaq composite fell 5.79, or 0.05%.Cranberry grower Northland Cranberries rose 2 3/4, or 18%, to 18 and apparel company Hampton Industries (Amex) jumped 7/8, or 18%, to 5 3/4 on favorable earnings reports.Eskimo Pie dropped 2 1/2, or 17%, to 12 1/2, and cryogenic refrigeration equipment company Helix Technology dropped 4 1/8, or 14%, to 26 1/2, after both reported lower third-quarter earnings.Software concern Vantive fell 9 1/2, or 23%, to 31 1/4, and Applix, a software applications company, fell 6 7/8 or 18% to 31 1/2 . Both posted third-quarter earnings that topped analysts' expectations. But Vantive said fourth-quarter and first-quarter revenue will be flat with, or slightly above, the third-quarter level. And Applix said it agreed to buy Sinper Corp., a developer of analytical processing software for about $11 million. SoundView Financial Group cut its short-term rating on Applix to hold from buy, while maintaining its long-term buy rating, and raising its 1996 and 1997 earnings projections for the company.Thermo Power (Amex) added 1 3/4, or 20%, to 10 3/8 after Lehman Brothers raised its rating on the natural-gas engine company to buy from neutral, and increased its 1997 earnings projection.Madge Networks lost 7/8, or 8%, to 10. The maker of networking products posted a third-quarter loss of 15 cents a share, compared with analysts' predictions of a one-cent loss, and with a year-earlier 27-cent profit. Lehman Brothers cut its rating to neutral from outperform, and reduced its 1997 earnings estimates.Datastream Systems, which develops maintenance and facility-management software, gained 2 1/4, or 12%, to 21 1/2 after posting third-quarter earnings that were up 24% from a year earlier.Automotive lock and key company Strattec Security was up 1 11/16, or 12%, to 16 3/16 after reporting first-quarter earnings that more than doubled the year-earlier level, and were well in excess of analysts' projections. The company also approved the buyback of as much as 5% of its outstanding common shares.On Nasdaq, advancing and declining issues were virtually even on national market volume of 483 million shares and overall volume of 546 million, compared with 529 million and 580 million, respectively, Thursday.The small-cap sector continued to be weighed down by the weakness of computer-related stocks, which, after leading the market higher for several weeks, have been retreating since mid-week. Smaller technology stocks have been harder hit than their larger-cap counterparts.Despite generally strong third-quarter earnings, investors have started to retreat from the technology group, partly on concerns that its recent strength may lead to an overbought situation. It was an overpriced tech sector that triggered the mid-summer correction, which took its greatest toll on the small-cap and Nasdaq markets.In addition to the computer index, the Nasdaq transportation, industrial and insurance indexes fell, while the biotechnology, telecommunications, bank and nonbank financial indexes moved higher.-- Larry Bauman.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal