When it comes to data on corporate insiders' stock moves, the small investor was long at a disadvantage.But the Internet has once again leveled the playing field between the institutional and individual investor. Several Web sites now provide sometimes market-moving data on insider transactions, often free.In the past,big dataproviders, such as Primark Corp., First Call/Thomson Financial and Argus Group's Vickers Stock Research Corp. unit, sold insider data and analysis to big institutional investors such as hedge funds and mutual funds, which gained access via computer. Small investors had to wait until the information trickled down through the media. By the time the small investor got it, the institutions already had plotted their moves."Suddenly these data are becoming affordable to individuals," said Jonathan Moreland, research director of the Insidertrader.com Web site. "It's only going to get cheaper."As reported in the Inside Track column last week, Primark, based in Waltham, Mass., launched InsiderScores.com, a Web site that ranks insiders according to how prophetic their moves have been. "The site has been incredibly well-received," said Craig Columbus, InsiderScores.com president.The site, which also provides fundamental data, earnings, company news and stock charts, has received nearly one million page views in its first week of operations, Mr. Columbus said.InsiderScores.com also plans a professional subscription version of the site that allows enhanced database searching.Mr. Moreland launched Insidertrader.com in May 1996. Since then, the site's subscriber base has grown to 2,500. About 100,000 individuals use the site every month, and in the past year page views have risen to 600,000 from 400,000 a month, Mr. Moreland said.A year ago, Individual Investor Group Inc., an online financial-information provider, bought the site. Some services are free; others come with a price tag. For example, investors get 13 months of detailed insider data for no charge. But it costs $49.95 a year for a newsletter; another $17.95 a month will pay for three years of detailed insider histories, plus the ability to download all SEC insider filings in the database the day they are filed. Insidertrader.com is adding institutional holdings data for $199 a month.There are more Web sites to come. Argus Group, publisher of Vickers Weekly Insider newsletter, plans to launch a site targeting small investors in the next few months. "That happens to be a very hot market right now," said Vickers vice president Barbara Palumbo. Vickers provides raw insider data for such Web sites as TheStreet.com, online brokers Charles Schwab Corp. and E*Trade Group, and CBS MarketWatch.First Call/Thomson Financial, which supplies raw data to Yahoo! and the Fool.com Web sites, plans a new site targeting the small investor in the second quarter of next year. Until then, users can access the Thomsoninvestor.net Web site, which provides a free overview of insider buying-and-selling trends. For $34.95 a year, investors get access to the names of who is actually doing the selling."The gap between what was considered institutional research and individual research has narrowed," says Bob Gabele, director of research for First Call/Thomson Financial.---Journal Link: For additional information about insider trading statistics, see The Wall Street Journal Interactive Edition at http://wsj.comCredit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal