NCR Corp. is expected to unveil software for big-company marketers to let them keep better track of customers who sometimes surf their Web sites and sometimes use information kiosks or call-centers.The new "Interaction Plus" software, which with consulting will cost big companies around $1 million, is designed to follow customer dealings so companies can increase sales."NCR is an early player in this customer-relationship-management space," said Carl Lehmann, vice president, electronic business strategies, for Meta Group Inc. "What NCR is doing is what a lot of large companies are trying to achieve."But NCR is moving into a market that a number of smaller companies have already targeted. Mr. Lehmann cited Blue Martini Software Inc. and Siebel Systems Inc., both in San Mateo, Calif.; and Vantive Corp. and Edify Corp., both in Santa Clara, Calif., among other companies working on linking different computer systems to improve customer relationships.NCR, a Dayton, Ohio, computer maker, gets much of its revenue from automated teller machines and point-of-sale terminals. It also has abig data-warehouse business, storing vast amounts of customer data for analysis. Scott Walters, who heads marketing for the new software, said the new product "pulls them together." He declined to forecast revenue.He said an airline could use the software to link currently separate Internet and call-center marketing. Since many people go to Web sites just to get information and later call companies to place orders, he suggests that the software could tell the clerk at the call center "that I'd surfed their site and looked at weekend getaway packages." If the traveler later makes a routine call to confirm a flight, "There's an opportunity for the call-center to say, 'Could I order you that trip to San Francisco?' There's a huge revenue-enhancement opportunity."He said the software will enhance the usefulness of information and ticketing kiosks, such as those NCR has sold to Continental Airlines. Ultimately the software will also be used with new ATMs that could sell trip insurance or suggest mutual-fund investments depending on a customers' interests.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal