SAN FRANCISCO -- Continuing its roll, Apple Computer Inc. said it would post a profit for the fifth quarter in a row amid robust product sales, and announced a new computer line that it hopes will stoke the momentum.The company's interim chief executive officer, Steve Jobs, didn't quantify the profit for the first quarter ended Dec. 24 in his keynote address at the MacWorld Expo trade show here. But analysts estimate that when the company reports its results next week, Apple will have quarterly net income of $109 million, or 68 cents a diluted share, compared with year-earlier profit of $47 million, or 33 cents a share. Analysts also estimate Apple will report sales of $1.85 billion, up from $1.6 billion a year before.Apple shares rose $2.0625, or 5%, on the news, closing at $43.3125 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.Much of last quarter's success was due to strong sales of the company's new iMac computer, which has gained popularity among consumers for its sleek design. Mr. Jobs said Apple shipped 800,000 of the machines between its launch date in mid-August and December. He didn't break out numbers for the quarter, but they are roughly in keeping with analyst estimates and equaled 522,000 units. Apple previously announced it had shipped 278,000 iMacs in the quarter ended in September."We could not be happier with these numbers," Mr. Jobs told about 3,000 MacWorld attendees.The iMac has helped Apple regain some of the market share it had lost during a dizzying two-year slide that was arrested when Mr. Jobs, the company's co-founder, took the helm in 1997. In November, for example, Apple's share of the U.S. retail market for desktop personal computers rebounded to 5.3% from 1.8% a year earlier, according to estimates by ZD Market Intelligence, a market-research firm in La Jolla, Calif. That was Apple's largest market share in that category since 1996.Still, some analysts question how much more share of the market Apple can regain, given the fact that the rest of the PC market continues to surge ahead at a pace of about 15% a year. Its PC competitors, meanwhile, are also churning out new models at prices considerably below those of Apple's iMac, which was initially priced at $1,299 and was dropped to $1,199 on a line of new models unveiled yesterday. By contrast, some PC models at Christmas were priced as low as $500."Apple has been on a surge, but they have to be able to come out with newer, cheaper systems every month," said Matt Sargent, analyst at ZD Market.In an interview, though, Mr. Jobs argued that most consumer buying is concentrated in the $1,000 range because those computers contain the enhanced features that customers want. "The products you get down below that are junk," he said.Apple, meanwhile, is packing more performance into its computers. The new Power Mac G3 lineup, for instance, features up to a 400-megahertz microprocessor with advanced three-dimensional graphics. The computers also come equipped with Apple's new FireWire technology for connecting peripheral devices such as digital cameras and camcorders.Demonstrations of G3s outperforming comparably outfitted Windows-based PCs drew cheers from the audience, but attendees appeared just as impressed by a radical design change in the new G3s. The models, priced between $1,599 and $2,999, come in a sleek blue tower with the same rounded corners as the iMac, as well as a side panel that opens like a door to reveal the circuitry inside. Other PCs have to be opened with screwdrivers in a cumbersome process.The new iMacs contain essentially the same design, with one notable difference: they now come in five colors -- including "strawberry" and "tangerine" -- instead of the original teal, which has been replaced by "blueberry." Mr. Jobs said customer surveys showed consumers were more interested in having a color selection than in the "mumbo jumbo" of product features. Finally, Mr. Jobs unveiled a version of Apple's next-generation Mac OS X that runs onbig data-storage servers. The server version, due to ship next month, includes such features as being able to deploy one operating system and applications across dozens of computer terminals. To dramatize the point, Mr. Jobs rolled out a bank of 50 iMacs that all downloaded and played the same film clip from a single server.Software developers that are crucial to Apple's future endorsed the company's strategy by deploying new programs for the Mac. Microsoft Corp., for instance, released new versions of its Internet Explorer browser and Outlook Express e-mail program with features exclusive to the Mac. Mr. Jobs announced that dozens of the top PC games -- including Id Software Inc.'s highly anticipated "Quake 3: Arena"were being made available for the Macintosh."A year and a half ago, nobody believed in the Mac ecosystem," said Rob Burgess, chief executive of Macromedia Inc., a big developer in San Francisco. "Now, the Mac is back."Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal