These are supposed to be salad days for the financial-data industry, as investors show their eagerness for all the information they can get on stocks and bonds.But instead of enjoying it, data providers are worrying about new competitors eating their lunch.Here's the problem for market-data providers: The Internet has made breaking financial news and data, such as stock quotations, more available than ever. It's all usually quite cheap and the quality is getting better. So while companies like Reuters Group PLC, Bridge Information Systems Inc. and Bloomberg LP still enjoy dominant positions in the $6 billion market for price data and analytics on markets, the Internet is challenging their growth prospects, analysts say.Consider that MoneyLine Network Inc., a fledgling Internet company operating Moneyline.com, offers news and prices -- even hard-to-find prices on mortgage-backed bonds -- for about $250 a month, undercutting traditional data providers like Bloomberg and Bridge that provide packages that can cost about $1,000 a month."There are certainly new challenges today," acknowledges Lou Eccleston, managing director at Bloomberg, "and technology makes it easier for competitors to launch new products, though they may not necessarily be competitive or sustainable."Customers, taking advantage of the new environment, are moving fast to adapt and save money. Brokerage firm A.G. Edwards Inc. in St. Louis, for example, is in the midst of installing cutting-edge Internet-based workstations to amalgamate data and news for all its brokers and traders, "which may slow the rate at which Bloomberg machines are purchased," says Steve Garrett, manager of private client service at A.G. Edwards.As the financial-services industry consolidates, particularly in the bond market, data users can often negotiate lower fees.Chase Manhattan Corp.'s Chase Manhattan Bank, for example, has cut its expenditures on market data services by 20% since it merged with Chemical Bank in 1996 by using cheaper alternatives, and taking advantage of its purchasing power to get better deals from providers, says a Chase spokesperson, adding: "We're not the only organization that does that if they have the scale."Certainly, the data providers' businesses remain solid now, partly because much of the information they provide is so technical. But flashy financial Web sites are vying to eat away at the monopoly big providers have had for years, even though the upstarts' service may not be as comprehensive or as fast."They all have significant revenue issues because the market for real-time data is price-constrained, with the increasing availability of near-real time or delayed pricing and news for free" says Larry Tabb, group director at TowerGroup, a technology-research firm in Needham, Mass.(Dow Jones andamp; Co., publisher of The Wall Street Journal, was in the market-data business when it owned its former Telerate subsidiary, now part of Bridge. Dow Jones now focuses on its core news and information business, but is still influenced by some of the same market forces that affect the data vendors. And the company owns preferred shares that can be converted into about 9% of Bridge, received as part of the consideration for the sale of Telerate.)It may be hard for investors to fathom that today's group of robust data mills could face real obstacles. Reuters commands 37% of the data market, while Bridge holds 23% and Bloomberg 21%, according to TowerGroup. And Bloomberg says it recorded $1.6 billion in revenue last year, up 33% from $1.2 billion in 1997. Further, complex bond data are harder to come by on the Internet than stock data, in part because there is no central bond exchange, making the fixed-income expertise of providers like Bloomberg more valuable.Yet even Bloomberg's growth rate should slow somewhat this year, with revenue hitting $1.8 billion, the company says. Overall, spending on market data and services within the securities industry will likely grow at a 9.3% pace this year, down from 16% in 1992, according to TowerGroup.A recent survey from Waters Information Services, a publishing and research company focusing on the financial-data industry, finds that Internet-based data providers now control 14% of the market.Indeed, the wide availability of information about U.S. stocks on the Web has changed the face of individual investing. Cheap, online trading is now testing traditional Wall Street brokerage houses, primarily because investors can research stocks by themselves now and place trades for as little as $5 a transaction.Some particularly tech-savvy brokers, such as Datek Online Holdings Corp., even offer "streaming," real-time stock quotations, which update automatically with each move in a stock.While many traders will stick to their old data vendors for the most up-to-the-minute prices, others may decide they don't need all that information in one, pricey package, some analysts argue. A trader who focuses exclusively on U.S. markets doesn't need prices from all over the globe, for instance."There's tens of thousands of pages on Telerate, but only the top few dozen are used widely," says Jonathan Robson, MoneyLine's chief executive officer, and a former Telerate executive. "So it's very easy for us to replicate that service by going to the same sources of content, aggregating it . . . and then deploying it at a much lower price point."Sites like MoneyLine can charge less than their competitors because they deliver information to a customer's desktop over an existing Internet connection and don't have to maintain proprietary systems, Mr. Robson says.And now that parts of those packages, like Bloomberg news articles, have migrated to the Internet (on Bloomberg's own Web site), "it's harder to justify having an integrated service," according to John Blossom, director of market research for Waters Information Services.For now, however, most professionals don't seem to be ready to change their ways dramatically. "The first thing I do in the morning is look at the Bloomberg, and most of us are wedded to it," says Robert MacIntosh, portfolio manager and chief economist, Eaton Vance Management in Boston. "It's all in one spot, which helps, and I can even get sports scores." Bloomberg executives argue their service is faster and more reliable than those of smaller competitors, and can be cheaper than collecting and integrating data from numerous different providers.But thebig dataproviders realize they must adjust to the new environment. Reuters, for example, has become a leading provider of news on the Internet, selling to more than 200 Internet sites and drawing 55% of its U.S. media revenue from the Internet. Reuters also uses the Internet, and Web technology, "for the delivery of large portions of our core financial products," says Robert Crooke, vice president for media relations at Reuters America. And Bridge now charges $75 a month for some low-end customer packages over the Internet.The Internet is "absolutely a challenge, and you can cannibalize your business by charging lower prices, but we figured we'd rather eat our own lunch than have someone else do it for us, and we've been able to grow the core business," says Tim Kelly, a senior vice president at Bridge.Meanwhile, Reuters owns Instinet Corp., which runs a leading alternativetrading system, and Bloomberg operates Tradebook ECN and is introducing a new bond-trading system, moves that should add to revenue in coming years.Credit: Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal