The New York Stock Exchange has proposed cutting the fees charged for stock-price quotes, the subject of a longrunning dispute with online brokers.The exchange's board yesterday approved cutting the price per "real-time" stock quote from one penny to three-quarters of a penny and the alternative monthly charge to $1 a customer from $5.25. At the same time, the amount any firm pays would be capped at $500,000 a month.Delayed quotes, as opposed to real-time quotes, remain free.The price of data fees has become a hot issue with the explosion of online trading. Although all broker-dealers have long wanted stock markets to lower the fees for their quote data, online brokers have been most vocal because their customers seek out stock quotes so frequently.Since brokers, not their customers, pay the data fees, most investors won't notice the change immediately, although some brokers may pass the cost savings on in the form of lower commissions.The action, which must be agreed to by other stock markets and the Securities and Exchange Commission, follows a similar proposed fee cut by the National Association of Securities Dealers, owner of the Nasdaq Stock Market, last week. It also comes a month after the SEC said it would launch its own review of marketdata fees.Robert Britz, group executive vice president of equities, market data and technology at the Big Board, said the changes result from discussions with brokers and the Securities Industry Association over the past year. He said in recent years many brokers have not only used quotes for internal purposes, but have offered them to customers as part of their service. That is especially so for online brokers, whose customers can call up the quotes on the Internet.As a result, brokers have "asked if we would take a look at more of an enterprisewide approach to pricing programs," Mr. Britz said.The controversy over market fees erupted after the Big Board, in late 1997, restructured fees to charge one cent for real-time stock quotes and nothing for those delayed several minutes. Previously, it charged half a cent for any quote. Although the Big Board said this was simply an additional option, not a fee increase, online brokers, led by the largest, Charles Schwab Corp., protested the move.Indeed, Richard Grasso, chairman and chief executive of the Big Board, called Schwab co-Chief Executive Officer David Pottruck yesterday to inform him of the new plan."It certainly addresses a great deal of our concerns," said Mr. Pottruck. "We expect to continue to have dialogue with the exchange about quote fees and other issues, but this is a huge step in the right direction."Mr. Pottruck said his firm paid market fees in the "multimillions" of dollars last year, and had taken to giving investors delayed, instead of real-time, quotes in some services as a result. With the new fee structure, "where we'd had to introduce delayed quotes, we'll resurrect realtime quotes. We might also [introduce] some new or different kinds of quote services."Market-data fees are an important source of revenue for the country's markets. Last year, the Big Board earned $111.5 million from data fees. The American Stock Exchange and Nasdaq also earn hefty data fees for their own stocks.Still, Mr. Britz said the new fee structure would likely only affect about 10% of its data revenue, since the bulk of data fees are paid by full-service brokers who pay a flat monthly fee per data terminal. Those fees range from $127 down to $18 a month, depending on how many terminals the firm has installed. While those fees are unchanged, several firms withbig databills will still benefit from the $500,000 monthly cap.The detailed fees are as follows: Providers of data to nonprofessional users will pay $1 a user each month, down from $5.25, for up to 250,000 users, and 50 cents for each additional user. The per-quote fee drops to 0.75 cent from 1 cent for the first 20 million quotes a month, 0.5 cent for the next 20 million and 0.25 cent for each additional quote.Mr. Britz anticipated that many brokers currently paying the per-quote fee will shift to the monthly per-user charge because of the drop in that charge.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal