EMC Corp., aiming to align costs with sluggish demand for its core data-storage hardware, will likely consider another round of layoffs, analysts say.The No. 1 maker ofbig data-storage systems eliminated 4,000 jobs last year and has already outlined plans to shrink its payroll to about 19,000 by midyear from 20,100 at the end of 2001. But several company watchers say that price cuts and falling revenue won't allow the company to make its predicted return to profitability in the second half of this year unless it makes deeper cuts. They expect an additional cut of as much as 10%, or 1,900 jobs, after the company closes its books on the first quarter.EMC spokesman Mark Fredrickson declined to comment on the forecasts of further cuts. He noted the Hopkinton, Mass., company is "still hiring here and there," especially in software and services, despite its net job shrinkage.Steve Duplessie, a former EMC employee who runs Enterprise Storage Group Inc., a Milford, Mass., research firm, said he expects a further 10% downsizing as the company moves to sell more software, which is less labor intensive than hardware production. "You can't go from selling boxes to selling software without having to change your ways," Mr. Duplessie says.Adds Clinton Vaughan, of Salomon Smith Barney: "I would expect EMC to continue to reduce its infrastructure costs, including head count." He expects to see a work-force reduction of about 10%.Harry Blount, an analyst with Lehman Brothers in New York, said the company "would need to do a 10% to 15% work-force reduction to get to a position of historical profitability," according to his earnings model for the firm. Analyst Laura Conigliaro of Goldman Sachs has also said she expects further cost cuts, but hasn't been specific.EMC officials had predicted in January that demand would pick up again in the second half of the year with a rebound of the U.S. economy, and had hinted profitability could return as early as the second quarter. But in its annual report, EMC warns investors that 2002 customer surveys "indicate that information-technology budgets may be further reduced" from 2001.Results for the first three months of the year are shaping up as weaker than expected, with five analysts recently reducing their revenue estimates about 7% to an average of about $1.3 billion, compared with $2.34 billion for the first quarter of 2001. Their loss estimates center on five cents a share, as compared with 18 cents a share in earnings for the year-earlier first quarter.EMC has been facing more competition from International Business Machines Corp. and Hitachi Ltd.'s data-storage-systems unit, through its marketing alliances with Hewlett-Packard Co. and Sun Microsystems Inc.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal