EMC Corp. revenue and earnings surged in the second quarter, bolstered by blistering sales of its midrange hardware devices. But thebig data-storage vendor said that corporate customers are tenaciously negotiating technology deals, and spending is expanding only gradually.The strong growth met analysts' expectations, but the results also provided evidence that some of the luster has come off the tech recovery, which seemed to be gleaming several months ago. Sales of EMC's flagship high-end Symmetrix storage line declined from the first quarter, and one of its newly acquired units, Documentum, turned in underwhelming numbers.EMC said the third quarter would show little or no growth in revenue and profit from the second. Chief Executive Joe Tucci added that the improvement in information-technology spending was "slow but steady." EMC, of Hopkinton, Mass., makes data-storage hardware and related software for corporations.Second-quarter net was $193 million, or eight cents a share, more than double the $81.7 million, or four cents a share, a year earlier. Revenue grew 33% to $1.97 billion. Revenue growth, excluding three relatively large acquisitions made last year, was 19%, EMC said, and 15% when currency fluctuations were also factored out.EMC shares gained 50 cents, or 4.8%, to $10.86 in 4 p.m. New York Stock Exchange composite trading. "The fact that they made numbers and reaffirmed the full-year guidance in this environment is viewed as a positive," said Joel Wagonfeld, an analyst at First Albany.Renenue for the midrange Clariion line jumped 43% from the year- earlier period, EMC said. Clariion has found new customers for EMC among smaller businesses, but has also cannibalized revenue from Symmetrix in larger accounts, said Kaushik Roy, an analyst at Susquehanna Financial Group. Mr. Roy owns fewer than 1,000 shares of EMC.Symmetrix revenue grew 5%. Mr. Tucci said rival International Business Machines Corp. had probably taken share among large customers by selling its own high-end storage machines along with its mainframe computers at a discount. He added that part of Symmetrix's weakness stemmed from a parts shortage.Mr. Tucci said that "less than five" large Documentum deals didn't close as expected in the quarter, as customers pressed for better contract terms. That malaise also afflicted rival Veritas Software Corp., which reported below-expected results early this month. Mr. Tucci said EMC didn't see buying delays in any unit other than Documentum, including the Legato group, which makes backup software that more directly competes with Veritas.