The world's wealthiest nations edged closer to a plan to ease the debt burden of countries ravaged by last month's tsunami, but the Bush administration wasn't ready to sign up for billions of dollars in debt relief.Separately, the U.S. plans to seek international cooperation on developing and running an early-warning system for tsunamis.The British government said it would ask the U.S. and other rich countries to declare an immediate halt to collecting debts from Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand and other affected nations. Such a moratorium ultimately could lead to the forgiveness of some portion of the tens of billions of dollars in outstanding international loans to the region and, in effect, boost the estimated $2 billion already pledged by Japan, the U.S., Britain and others.Debt relief would ensure "that the money goes to the people and areas in the greatest need," said British Chancellor of the Exchequer Gordon Brown in a news release. Britain plans to present the proposal at a creditors' meeting in Paris next week and at a meeting of finance ministers from the Group of Seven major industrialized nations early next month.Yesterday, the death toll's climb from Dec. 26's offshore Indonesian earthquake and the tsunami it generated appeared to be slowing sharply. At least 139,580 deaths in southern Asia and eastern Africa were reported by the Associated Press. Tens of thousands of people remain missing or at risk of death from disease, and millions are homeless, as rescue teams grapple with ruined roads and intense suffering. The death toll for Westerners and Asians from countries outside the high-impact area is estimated at 340, with 3,900 missing. The United Nations children's fund, Unicef, estimates about 50,000 children died and tens of thousands were orphaned.A new concern has surfaced in Indonesia, where officials, fearing that child-trafficking gangs will exploit the chaos of the disaster, have placed restrictions on youngsters leaving the country and stepped up police vigilance, especially around refugee camps, according to the AP. Unicef and other child-welfare groups warn that the gangs, which are well-established in Indonesia, may be shifting orphans into trafficking networks or selling them for forced labor or even sexual slavery.Indonesia estimates 35,000 children on Sumatra island's Aceh province lost one or both parents in the disaster. Aceh, the hardest- hit area in the country, isn't far from the port city of Medan and nearby island of Batam, which are well-known transit points for gangs shipping children and teenagers out of Indonesia.Secretary of State Colin Powell was in Bangkok yesterday, before heading south to the resort island of Phuket, the center of the Thai relief operations. Mr. Powell is with an American delegation that includes President Bush's brother, Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, touring the stricken region. Mr. Powell is scheduled to join Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan and other global leaders in Jakarta tomorrow to discuss coordinating the complex aid effort.The Bush administration expects debt relief will figure in the international aid effort. The U.S. hasn't committed to any amount or plan, and officials disputed Mr. Brown's claim that there already was an agreement."We're in discussions with our G-7 colleagues on how best to assist these countries from the perspective of their debt payments," said Tony Fratto, a U.S. Treasury Department spokesman.Japan appeared to rule out a debt write-off, but left open the possibility of other forms of debt relief. Indonesia alone owes Japan more than $29 billion. "Debt reduction will not be an option," said a Japanese Finance Ministry official. "But we are studying various policy options."Meanwhile, the U.S. delegation to a U.N. conference in Japan next week will unveil a prototype early-warning system for tsunamis and will call on other nations to cooperate on developing and operating such a network.The system, using a new type of buoy connected to an underwater pressure sensor, would cost what one official estimated to be in the "low tens of millions of dollars" to set up, and if in operation on Dec. 26 might have helped save some of the thousands of lives lost.Much of the technology and equipment already exists to provide such warnings, said Conrad C. Lautenbacher, head of the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Some of this was in use in the Indian Ocean area, but because nations don't always share such data or don't link it automatically to research centers that can interpret it quickly, "big datavoids" existed in the region the day the tsunami waves hit, he said. "We are going to encourage other nations to come together and help us fill some of these voids."At next week's conference, to be held in Kobe, Japan, participants will discuss disaster-mitigation strategies, and U.S. officials will demonstrate how the buoys can be used with automated tidal gauges and seismic stations to provide early warning. The U.S. will help pay for and maintain a warning system using them if other nations join in. A more detailed plan will be presented at a meeting next month in Brussels, where European Union members and 53 other nations will consider a 10-year effort to establish an international Earth observation system.The U.S. and other industrial nations already spend billions of dollars on satellites, seismographic stations, ocean sensors and computerized systems capable of almost-instant analysis of climate and weather changes. Gaps in the systems meant that the first signs of the tsunami in the Indian Ocean came when its waves devastated crowded beaches and coastal communities.There is only one seismographic station in the region, located in Thailand, and while it reported the undersea earthquake that caused the tsunami, it wasn't linked to the U.S. earthquake information center in Golden, Colo., to provide the data instantly. Two stations in Western Australia reported more quickly, but there was a lag because of their distance from the event.---How to HelpCharities and relief agencies around the world have set up hotlines and Websites for donations to assist recovery efforts in areas hardest hit by theAsian tsunami. For other tsunami-relief options, see InterAction.org, aconsortium of international aid charities that meet strict operationalcriteria. Here are some of the organizations participating in the effort :-- AmeriCares.: Call 800-486-4357 or visit www.americares.org.-- CARE.: Call 800-521-2273 or visit www.careusa.org.-- The International Red Cross and Red Crescent societies.: Call 800-HELP-NOW or visit www.redcross.org.-- Oxfam America, Asia Earthquake Fund.: Call 800-77-OXFAM or visitwww.oxfamamerica.org-- Save the Children Federation.: Call 800-728-3843 or visitwww.savethechildren.org.