In a move that shows the growing interest in using the Linux operating system inbig datacenters, mainframe maker Unisys Corp. is expected to announce today that it will offer Linux as well as Microsoft Corp.'s Windows on its powerful ES 7000 servers.Unisys, of Blue Bell, Pa., was one of the earliest and most loyal advocates of using Windows in the central servers that power back- office operations. That market is a key objective for Microsoft as it tries to expand beyond desktop personal computers and low-end servers.Joe McGrath, president and chief operating officer of Unisys, said, "It's been a tough decision for us" to add Linux. "We didn't want to endanger our relationship with Microsoft." But he said customers, especially in government agencies and financial-services firms -- two of Unisys's biggest markets -- have been saying they aren't interested in the ES 7000 unless Unisys provides it with Linux.Jeff Price, a director in Microsoft's Windows Server group, said Windows is growing strongly in all servers and it views Unisys's decision as being "about moving off proprietary Unix" to either Linux or Windows. He noted that customers can simultaneously run Windows and Linux on the Unisys systems and predicted that many Linux users eventually will shift to Windows.Mr. McGrath doesn't expect to see customers who would have bought Windows taking Linux instead. "These are different markets," he said. The buyers of high-end Windows servers tend to be firms that already use Windows on lots of small servers and seek savings by consolidating onto a more-powerful machine.He said buyers of powerful Linux servers are frequently data centers that have been using proprietary Unix systems and want to switch to cheaper open-source systems from the proprietary systems made by International Business Machines Corp., Sun Microsystems Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co.  "There's a segment of the market that will only go from Unix to Linux. It's like a religious discussion," he said.Unisys, which gets about 80% of its revenue from providing computer services, is a relatively small player in the server market. Analysts estimate that about one-quarter of its $1.22 billion in hardware sales last year came from the Windows-based ES 7000 line, although market researcher International Data Corp. says Unisys is the market leader in sales of Windows servers costing more than $50,000 apiece.