WITH LOWER Manhattan's autumn telecommunications mayhem in mind, firms that depend on huge but dispersed electronic files are suddenly reassessing their disaster-recovery plans.GiantLoop Network Inc. is one of the outfits angling to take advantage of the environment. The company's pitch: By connecting widely scattered computer storage centers with a dedicated fiber-optic network using its software, firms are less likely to lose critical information in a disaster and will get speedier reconnections.GiantLoop, Waltham, Mass., doesn't typically provide the fiber-optic capacity, but instead sells sophisticated software products that help customers better manage their own networks. The company also offers the service of running these complex data networks for customers that don't want to hire and train the staff needed for the 24-hour task.Founded less than two years ago by Chairman Harry Dixon, a former sales chief at storage giant EMC Corp., GiantLoop is packed with former EMC executives. Six of its eight top officers came from EMC; a seventh, Chief Financial Officer Andrew Hajducky, held that same title at onetime Internet darling CMGI Inc.The closely held company has raised $160 million in venture capital from Greylock Management Corp., Pilot House Ventures Group LLC, and others. Roger Marino, a co-founder of EMC, also is a backer.Mr. Dixon, who at EMC made regular sales calls on the biggest storage consumers, saw that companies were investing heavily in setting up individual islands of storage capacity. But analysts were predicting that companies would have an increasing need to connect these storage pods over high-speed links, enabling them to better use costly storage capacity and gain swift access to information stored at multiple locations. So Mr. Dixon and his cadres of former EMCers left to found their own networking communications company."There's a market that's happening for networked management of data," says Mark Ward, the former EMC marketing chief who assumed the role of chief executive at GiantLoop last February. GiantLoop's customers include large financial institutions and other data-intensive businesses, including Wells Fargo andamp; Co.The centerpiece of the company's business is a software tool that allows information-technology chiefs to manage and allocate data-storage capacity at off-site locations, which the company says eliminates the need for costly technicians at each storage center and provides other efficiencies. GiantLoop says the average customer pays it $375,000 for an annual software license, and $50,000 a month for maintenance and upgrades.Mr. Ward declined to provide specific information about GiantLoop's revenues or profitability. But he said the company -- which has 210 employees and costly research and development spending -- won't need additional funding.Not surprisingly, industry giants such as Verizon Communications and WorldCom Inc. see similar opportunities. "All of those companies are targeting the same customers with the biggest technology budgets," says Michael Smith, managing director at Stratecast Partners in Philadelphia, a telecom research firm.Market researcher Gartner Dataquest says the overall market for network storage equipment and software reached $26 billion in 2001; the narrower software niche in which GiantLoop is playing was about $8 billion, the research firm says.To position the firm against deep-pocketed rivals, GiantLoop officials stress their storage-industry background and pledge to provide superior customer service. "Since they come from a data-centric world, they know better than the giant telecoms of the world how to help a technology chief fully integrate the outside `electronic plumbing' into a company's own internal system," says Steve Duplessie, head of Enterprise Storage Group Inc., a research firm in Milford, Mass.One of GiantLoop's first clients was Chicago-based Options Clearing Corp., which processes financial-derivatives trades for many major exchanges. Options Clearing tapped GiantLoop to build a new fiber-optic network as part of a project to move itsbig datacenter.David Engaldo, who heads Options Clearing's data-center operations, says his firm considered several large telecom outfits, but was concerned that those firms would only provide the needed connections outside its buildings, not end-to-end service. "We wanted to have someone that we could call on the phone right away if something went wrong" with any part of the project, Mr. Engaldo says.In addition to pitching software directly to big companies, Mr. Ward is offering GiantLoop's software and consulting services in a "partnership" package with telecom firms that have physical networking capacity but lack GiantLoop's design and management capabilities. It has recently signed such partnership deals with Internet-services provider Globix Corp. and Consolidated Edison Inc.'s Con Ed Communications unit. Under the Con Ed pact, for example, the partners will offer customers a package deal in which GiantLoop will design, build and then manage a network using Con Ed's optical fiber systems.In addition, GiantLoop recently decided to expand into a related field, helping big companies manage storage systems within individual data centers -- a highly competitive sector dominated by EMC, Veritas Software Inc. and a host of big computer makers.To develop the needed software, GiantLoop hired another former EMC manager, technologist Yuval Ofek, who formerly headed development of software for EMC's most powerful family of storage computers. With these new tools, GiantLoop says customers will be able to more closely track data both within data centers and along the networks that connect them. "Customers want to be able to picture the storage environment as a whole," says Mr. Ofek.Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal