Investors were hoping for a fresh start in the new year. They are still hoping.News yesterday that December manufacturing activity fell to its weakest level in almost ten years spurred more fears of weak corporate profits and possibly even a recession. That sent the Nasdaq Composite Index, which fell 39% last year, down a further 7.23% on the year's first trading day, as government bonds soared.The 10-year Treasury note, a place of refuge in times of trouble, took its biggest one-day leap in value since the world financial crisis of 1998. In a milestone that reflects bonds' strength, the yield on the 10-year Treasury note dropped below 5%; it hadn't finished below that mark since early 1999.But stocks sagged across the board. The Nasdaq composite's percentage loss was its seventh-heaviest ever, and by far the worst drop it has taken on any year's first trading day since the index was created in 1971."It was a lousy start to the new year," said Matthew Johnson, head of Nasdaq trading at Lehman Brothers.The dive left the Nasdaq index, which is dominated by battered technology stocks, down 178.66 points, dropping below 2300 to end at 2291.86. The closing was a level the index first crossed on Jan. 6, 1999, almost two years ago. The index now has given up almost all of its record 86% surge in 1999.The Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index fell 2.8%, its second-worst opening-day decline since 1929, after a 3.7% drop in 1932, according to Ned Davis Research.The Dow Jones Industrial Average was less hard-hit, falling 1.3%, or 140.70 points, to 10646.15.With many market participants still on vacation yesterday, overall trading volume wasn't unusually heavy. Some market watchers look to the first few trading days of the year as an indication of what to expect for the entire year, but some traders and analysts pointed out that the first trading day alone often is quirky, and thus isn't a good predictor of performance."This is an ugly day, but I don't know if the first trading day of the year is ever a really representative day," said Jon Olesky, head of block trading at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter. "You still had a number of participants who weren't in."Still, "in the stocks that were down there was a lot of volume," Mr. Johnson said. "And in general those were the names that performed the best last year that were held up until the end of the year." He noted that "you had a day when General Electric acted poorly, as well as Cisco Systems. When you have a number of the market leaders down for the day, that doesn't bode well for the market."The federal government is due to release December employment data on Friday. A few investors speculated that a weak jobs number could provoke the Federal Reserve to announce an immediate cut in its interest-rate guidelines, without waiting for its scheduled policy meeting at the end of this month. Other investors speculated that the Fed might wait for its regular meeting on Jan. 30 and 31, and then cut rates by half a percentage point.The prospect of a rate cut drove bonds sharply upward, as did a flight of money out of stocks and into safer-seeming government bonds. The 10-year Treasury note soared 1 18/32, or $15.63 for each $1,000 invested. That drove the bond's yield, which moves inversely to its price, down to 4.906%, its lowest level since February 1999, nearly two years ago."Institutional investors are finally coming to grips with the fact that the economic environment is populated by many more dark clouds than they thought," and they are shifting into Treasurys as a result, said Chris Fitzmaurice, co-head of U.S. government-bond trading at Salomon Smith Barney.Bond investors said that futures prices now reflect the expectation of a half-point rate cut within the next month or two in the Fed's benchmark federal-funds rate, the rate at which banks lend one another money overnight. And futures indicate the expectation that the fed-funds rate, currently 6.5%, will fall a full percentage point, to 5.5%, by summer.Investors in government bonds care only about interest rates, so they are celebrating. But stock investors care about earnings as well, and they are wringing their hands. Some fretted that, if the Fed cuts rates by a quarter point, it won't be viewed as enough. And if the Fed cuts by half a point, those same investors could take it as a sign that the economy is in real trouble.Bottom line: Investors are in such a jittery mood that almost any information is getting a negative spin.History, for its part, shows that the first trading day of a year for the Nasdaq Composite Index, in particular, has been a poor predictor of the full year's performance.In years when the first day was down for the Nasdaq, in fact, the index has almost always finished up. In the 29 years beginning in 1972, the Nasdaq composite has been flat or down on 15 of its first trading days, and up on only 14 of the first days, according to Ned Davis Research. In years when the first day was flat or down, it has finished down only twice, and up 13 times. It has been more likely to finish up in years when its first day was down than it has in years when its first day was up.The yearly performance of the Dow Jones Industrial Average, for its part, has had almost no correlation at all with its first-day activity.The real problem, Mr. Olesky said, is that some investors may be reluctant to put money into stocks right now, and may be putting new money into bonds instead.Anecdotally, he said, "There definitely is a more cautious view. People are saying, `I'm not sure I want to put more money into equities.' " They are worried that "the fundamentals are getting worse, and they probably are going to get worse before they get better."The latest fuel for that worry was a much sharper-than-expected decline in December manufacturing activity, as reported yesterday by the National Association of Purchasing Management. Manufacturing hit its weakest level since April 1991, around the time that the last recession was ending. The manufacturing index's decline was its fourth in a row, to 43.7 in December from 47.7 in November. Any reading under 50 indicates the manufacturing sector is actually contracting, not just growing more slowly.On top of that, some brokerage firms issued cautious reports on the prospects for tech-equipment sales. Among the day's big losers werebig data-storage and networking names, some of which had managed to hold on to sharp gains last year despite the overall tech selloff. Data-storage leader EMC fell 18% and networking equipment maker Ciena dropped 19% yesterday.Overall, the market value of U.S. stocks has fallen 20% on paper, or $3.43 trillion, to $13.53 trillion, since hitting a high of about $16.96 trillion on March 24, based on the market value of the companies in the Wilshire 5000 index. That includes the loss to investors yesterday of a total of about $473.75 billion, or 3.38%. The Wilshire 5000 includes about 7,200 companies, or nearly every publicly traded company with headquarters in the U.S. Unlike the Nasdaq composite, however, the Wilshire hasn't quite fallen back to its 2000 low, hit on Dec. 20, when its market value was $13.31 trillion.The selling left the Nasdaq less than 300 points above 2000, a level it first crossed in July 1998 -- nearly 21/2 years ago.That means that the tortoise now is well ahead of the hare. Over the past two years, the plodding Dow Jones Industrial Average, laden mostly with Old Economy stocks (but also including Nasdaq stocks Microsoft and Intel), is up nearly 16%. The Nasdaq composite, dominated by New Economy tech names, is up less than 4%.Some traders feared that one of the few notes of hope in the stock market these days, the prospect of a big Fed rate cut this month, could fail to materialize, leading to more selling."I think the market is beginning to think that we will have a half-point cut on the 31st of January, and I don't think that is in [Fed Chairman] Alan Greenspan's repertoire," said Mr. Johnson of Lehman Brothers.What's more, it wasn't just the tech stocks that got hit yesterday. Even "value" stocks, Old Economy stocks that had been knocked down in 1999 and rebounded last year, fell back yesterday."Value stocks have done so well that they aren't cheap anymore, especially with the economy slowing the way it is," said Richard Unruh, chief investment officer for stocks at Philadelphia asset-management group Delaware Investments. "Now there could be some disappointment in value stocks as well."The Nasdaq is deep in a bear market now, defined as a 20% drop from a high. But the Dow industrials and the Sandamp;P 500 aren't. The Nasdaq composite finished the day yesterday down 54.6% from its March 10, 2000, record close, while the Dow industrials still are down only 9% from their Jan. 14 record, and the Sandamp;P 500 is down 16% from its March 24 record.The average share of stock listed on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday fell 90 cents, or 2.29%, to $40.23.Outside the U.S., stocks declined in dollar terms. The Dow Jones World Stock Index, excluding U.S. stocks, fell 0.31%, or 0.48 point, to 156.51.In major U.S. market action:Stocks retreated. On the Big Board, where 1.1 billion shares traded, 1,339 stocks advanced and 1,718 declined.Bonds gained. The 30-year bond was up 1 28/32 to yield 5.340%.The dollar was mixed. Late in New York, it traded at 94.98 cents to the euro and 114.49 yen to the dollar, weakening from 94.24 cents and strengthening from 114.35 yen.---Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal