INTEL CORP.'S CRUSADE to promote a wireless world kicks into a higher gear this week. But some competitors have a head start in the race to broaden the reach of unwired communications.The chip company, at its twice-yearly forum for software and hardware developers, is expected to discuss plans to expand the communications capabilities of portable computers, cellular phones and consumer-electronics products. One major focus for the event, opening tomorrow in San Jose, Calif., will be advancements in a wireless data- transmission technology known as Wi-Fi that is quickly becoming a standard feature in notebook computers. Intel and other companies are racing to extend the range of Wi-Fi and bring it to newer products, such as devices for transferring digital files from home PCs to TVs and stereo equipment.Though relatively new to communications, Intel hopes to exploit its investments in manufacturing technology to pack more features on new wireless chips. The company, for example, has discussed new chips that can automatically seek out different portions of the communication spectrum, adapting by changes in software. By avoiding the need for chips tailored to specific frequencies, such flexible technology could make it easier for cellular phones to use Wi-Fi networks to quickly move digital photographs or other large files.Patrick Gelsinger, Intel's chief technology officer, says the key to such advances will be its ability to manufacture chips with multiple chunks of special-purpose circuitry for processing tasks in parallel. "We think that is the breakthrough that will really make software- defined radios work," Mr. Gelsinger said.The same basic concept -- packing many separate brains on a single piece of silicon -- is also increasingly important to Intel's core microprocessor business. Among other things, Intel is expected this week to give the first details of a follow-on to its Itanium chip line, code-named Tanglewood, that may have up to 16 built-in processors when it is delivered in 2006.But Intel is behind competitors such as International Business Machines Corp. and Sun Microsystems Inc. in delivering multiprocessor technologies. It is also behind rivals in Wi-Fi, despite a high- profile branding campaign called Centrino that has helped popularize the technology.Intel originally hoped to manufacture communications chips to go along with the March introduction of Centrino, a brand applied to notebook computers that uses Intel's Pentium-M microprocessor as well as two sets of accessory chips. But production problems forced the company to resell other companies' Wi-Fi chips, pushing the delivery date for its own technology to the third quarter.Last week, Intel said it now expects those products to be ready in October. Even then, Centrino-branded laptop computers won't offer a faster Wi-Fi variant called 802.11g that competitors have been selling since late last year.Rivals are trying to extend their advantage. Broadcom Corp., for example, today is introducing 802.11g Wi-Fi chips that the company says will allow a notebook computer to operate 20 minutes longer on a single battery charge than other machines using the Pentium-M.The Irvine, Calif., company also recently announced a product that combines all Wi-Fi communications functions onto a single piece of silicon, including power amplifier functions that ordinarily require different manufacturing processes. "We are 12 to 18 months ahead of Intel from a technology standpoint," asserted Jeff Abramowitz, a Broadcom senior director of marketing.Another competitor, closely held Atheros Communications Inc., today is announcing Wi-Fi chips with a transmission range of up to a kilometer (0.62 mile), roughly twice the distance offered by most products. Craig Barratt, Atheros's president and chief operating officer, predicted its chips will be used both to improve the coverage of home Wi-Fi networks, as well as public "hot-spots" operated by cafes and other businesses. The technology requires the use of Atheros chips both in portable computers as well as in wireless base stations.Intel is sparing no expense to close the gap. It is promoting several technologies to help extend the range of wireless networks, including a technology called WiMAX for bringing Internet access to entire neighborhoods without wires.But Silicon Valley isn't waiting for Intel. Start-ups such as Airgo Networks Inc. of Palo Alto, Calif., are using advanced antennas to extend the range of wireless networks. Others, such as Tropos Networks Inc., are tying Wi-Fi hot spots together so that users can move through major portions of a city without losing their connections. The company helped wire much of downtown Half Moon Bay, Calif., and is now helping police in nearby San Mateo, where it is based, use a special- purpose Wi-Fi network from their patrol cars.---Wider WirelessNew approaches to extend the capabilities and uses ofWi-Fi and other wireless networks:-- WiMAX: A standard being finalized to deliver broadbandInternet access to homes, in place of cable anddigital-subscriber-line services.-- Ultra-wideband: A transmission scheme offering hightransmission speed and low power usage, for uses such assending audio and video to set-top boxes and DVD recorders.-- Mesh networks: A technique for linking Wi-Fi accesspoints to serve a larger geographic area, much as cellularcalls are passed between transmission towers.-- Smart antennas: Transmission antennas with modifieddesign and shape, capable of sending Wi-Fi signals overgreater distances.-- Hybrid phones: Future phones will use cellular forvoice traffic but seek out Wi-Fi networks to sendbig datafiles, such as photographs.---Corrections andamp; AmplificationsCRAIG BARRATT is president and chief executive officer of Atheros Communications Inc. An article yesterday about Intel Corp. and wireless technologies incorrectly identified him as president and chief operating officer of Atheros.(WSJ Sept. 16, 2003)