For a pioneer of the digital age, Brewster Kahle looks awfully analog.He proposed to his wife by printing "Will you marry me?" on an antique letterpress. He named his first child after a popular 18th-century typeface called Caslon. And he often compares himself to a librarian in ancient Alexandria.But no one involved with the Internet is fooled by that. Mr. Kahle, who is 38 years old, is a Web philosopher with a knack for turning his woolliest ideas into investment home runs. In 1995, he sold a futuristic outfit that searched vast pools of online data to America Online Inc. for $15 million in stock. Then he started a company that sought to keep track of absolutely everything on the Web. Last month he agreed to sell that one, Alexa Internet, to online megaretailer Amazon.com Inc. for stock valued at more than $250 million.That's a lot of money for a 50-person company with less than $500,000 in annual revenue and no profit. But Web companies are on the prowl for tiny companies with big ideas -- and Mr. Kahle's ideas, many centered on the safekeeping of human knowledge, have become a lucrative commodity.Alexa's vast databases use technology to capture the online footprints of users as they travel across the Web and figure out discernible patterns from that movement. For online retailers like Amazon, that kind of information is anything but abstract: It could help determine how to put in front of people exactly what they want to buy when they want to buy it.Mr. Kahle is nearly euphoric at the prospect of being able to reach out to Amazon's 8.5 million users for an even better sense of how the Web truly operates. "I have always thought that the hidden resource of the Internet is not the content... but the users," he says. In fact, he adds, the questions to ask are these: "Where did other people go that were on this Web page that I'm looking at? Where else did they go in such a way that they had a good time? What can others with experience teach me?"These were the weighty issues he debated with Jeff Bezos this year when the billionaire founder of Amazon flew down from Seattle to visit Alexa's offices on the old Presidio Army base of San Francisco, overlooking the Golden Gate Bridge. The pair ignored the stellar view, engaging instead in lively discussion. Says Mr. Kahle: "It was very geeky, but he seemed to get it, and we started to drink each other's Kool-Aid pretty quickly. The effect was that I thought, `I could really work for this guy.' "Much of their conversation centered on the importance of collecting "metadata" -- information about information. It's the kind of topic that crops up at the regular Thursday dinners that Mr. Kahle and his wife, Mary Austin, have for technology savants at their home, also on the Presidio. As a way to jump-start conversation, Mr. Kahle asks the assembled to ponder a deep question. "What does it take to build your dream?" he asked on a recent evening.A graduate of Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Mr. Kahle designed supercomputers for a decade at Thinking Machines Corp. It was there that Wide Area Information Server, the company he sold to AOL, started as a research project. After a period of testing, the company became quickly profitable from contracts with unlikely sources, such as the short-lived presidential campaign of H. Ross Perot and later his database firm, Perot Systems. Other customers included the New York Times, The Wall Street Journal and Encyclopaedia Britannica.Mr. Kahle's WAIS was designed to be used by mainstream customers who use personal computers, which is why he sold to AOL. He considered the online service to be at the forefront of bringing interactive technology to the average Joe. And since AOL was able to pay publishers royalties with usage fees from customers, it seemed like a natural fit to Mr. Kahle. "I'd always been interested inbig dataand how do you make that information accessible to the masses," he says. "But when you had just a big computer with no way to access it, it was sort of like having a Ferrari that nobody knew how to drive."After a short stint at AOL, Mr. Kahle left to found Alexa, using $1 million of his own windfall, along with $300,000 from Bill Dunn, formerly an executive with AOL, and a $10 million investment from the same Swiss investment group that owns Encyclopaedia Britannica. Mr. Kahle named the start-up after the ancient Egyptian Library of Alexandria and dubbed himself the Internet's Demetrius, its first librarian."It was the last place a group of people tried to collect all knowledge in one place, but after 2,000 years it became too big a collection to be able to do that with, because of the size of the paper and physical objects," he says. "Now, with electronics, you can actually collect it all in one place and organize it."But the Web has often been described as a giant library with all the books scattered on the floor. And since it was growing by an estimated 1.5 million pages a day, figuring out a way for a user to determine all that was available was no easy task. Mr. Kahle has pressed ahead anyway, using two ways to collect information: robot technology that crawls the Web and software that latches on to users' browsers and sends information about "clickstreams" back to Alexa computers. Along with the actual pages comes other information, including the number of people visiting the site, the places they jumped off to and what other Web sites were linked to it. Alexa's databases are now 13 terabytes in size, equivalent to 13 million books.While some Web sites stop Mr. Kahle's robot technology from collecting the information, he says, most do not block it. And those users who don't want Alexa software to track their movements can disable the software, though most do not.But how much information customers want online companies to have about their habits has yet to be sorted out. Mr. Kahle is aware of the myriad of privacy concerns raised by the sale to Amazon of Alexa, which he says will be run as a separate subsidiary. That means that strict guidelines on the use of the information he collects will remain in place, he says, including filters that make anonymous individual names and dissociate personal data.While Mr. Kahle is adamant that Alexa's privacy protections won't change, Amazon has yet to indicate how it plans to use Alexa technology with its retail services. Mr. Kahle says he has extracted a promise from Mr. Bezos to keep information flowing from Alexa to the Internet Archive, a nonprofit service he co-founded that preserves Web data for research purposes and posterity. The Archive is separate from Alexa but relies on it for raw material.Mr. Kahle has even had the Web preserved in artistic form, commissioning an interactive sculpture by Alan Rath that he donated to the Library of Congress last year. Made up of 44 digital tapes and four fire-engine-red monitors piled one atop another, it displays pages gleaned from 500,000 sites from January and February 1997, continually flashing three sites a second.Steeped as he is in electronic data, Mr. Kahle is also a bibliophile. He binds books by hand as a hobby and a few years ago designed an accordion-style diary that lies flat without a spine so that he could write without interruption or discomfort. "When you are writing your deepest thoughts," he says, "you should not be stopped by the technology you use to do so."---Almost no one on the planet knows more about the entire contents of the Web than Brewster Kahle. Once he gave the Library of Congress a sculpture (left) made up of pages from 500,000 sites. Some of his Web favorites:-- Encyclopaedia Britannica, www.eb.com`I like to go to this site when I come back from an historical movie to find out more about a topic.'-- Old election sites`It's important to save these, at the very least to go back and make sure they kept--or probably didn't keep--their campaign promises. Since the Internet is a primary way of broadcasting information, rather than getting it secondarily through the media, it's important to see how politicians wanted to portray themselves.'-- Heaven's Gate`This may seem morbid, but the members of that cult were Web designers, so a great deal of what they had to say and what they believed was only posted on the Internet. All their manifestos and signs to what was going to happen are there and we need to save it in order to go back and understand how these things happened.'-- www.megacar.com`Fringe sites are are all over the Web and they give a flavoring of the world for a particular moment and paint a portrait of a time that is difficult to get from the official record. There is one site still up that I love, for example, at www.megacar.com, which is an effort to put a local area network in a car. The idea is so clearly wacky that it would probably have disappeared over time without a trace unless we save it.'-- My Yahoo, www.my.yahoo.com`It is a great customizable briefing in the morning of everything I want to know.'-- Internet Movie Database, www.imdb.com`This may sound self-serving since Amazon owns them now, but I have always loved this site. It is a great movie database, which uses the Internet community in a way that is kind of unique, because it makes a database out of contributions of thousands and thousands of people's ideas.'-- Peapod, www.peapod.com`I love home-delivered groceries. I would probably should use Home Grocer [a rival service that Amazon invested $42 million in earlier this week] now, but it is not available in the San Francisco Bay area yet. But I want all these services to be terrific, since grocery shopping is not the highlight of my day.'Credit: Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal