Technology terms that have been used and then discarded usually don't get a second go at things. "Solid-state" is an exception. Several decades back, the phrase became synonymous with "modern," as solid-state television sets and radios dispensed with bulky, hot and unreliable vacuum tubes in favor of transistors. Very Space Age.Now, "solid-state" is making a comeback, this time in the world of computer storage. The term is being resurrected to describe "disk" drives that dispense with spinning disks and instead store information on flash memory.Flash has been around for ages. It's a computer chip like the one used for your computer's internal memory, but it doesn't forget everything when you turn the power off. Flash has long been used to make those thumb-size USB drives popular for transferring data between home and office. It's also inside Apple's iPod Nano music players.What's new in flash is that it is just now becoming cheap enough that flash chips can be used as the innards of solid-state drives to replace traditional disk drives, which provide long-term storage on your computer.This new breed of solid-state drives have the same housings and connections as hard-disk drives. Just unplug your disk drive and plug in a solid-state replacement. Your computer won't know the difference; except the solid-state drive will be lighter, quieter, more energy efficient and, absent moving parts, more reliable.It will also be faster, though how much so depends on the application. If you were booting Windows off a solid-state drive, it would load twice as quickly as from a disk drive. But other chores are speedier still -- by six or eight times. These include snagging small bits of information from different files, a common occurrence inbig databases.A traditional disk drive takes time to spin around and position itself so that the needed data are underneath the drive "head" that does the reading and writing. There is no such delay with flash, because it's all nonmoving, solid-state electronics. Earlier this month, Dell announced that it would offer solid-state drives from SanDisk as an option on some of its laptop computers, moving us closer to a computer with no moving parts at all. (The fan that cools the microprocessor is slowly being designed away.) The 32 gigabyte drives aren't cheap; they will run $450, or enough to buy 1,000 gigabytes of storage on a traditional hard disk drive.But solid-state prices, always on a decline, are now falling faster than ever. One company in the solid-state business was buying bulk quantities of flash for $56 a gigabyte six months ago; the figure is now down to $9 a gigabyte and keeps heading south.Jeff Janukowicz, who follows solid-state storage for IDC, says it's not yet clear how many laptop road warriors will be willing to pay the surcharge for solid-state drives.In higher-end devices, there isn't much debate over whether solid- state drives will take off quickly. The advantages of rapid data retrieval and low power consumption are too compelling.Concurrent Computer, a Duluth, Ga., company that makes servers used for the video-on-demand market that can cost millions of dollars, has just begun to ship products with solid-state drives supplied by STEC Inc. of Santa Ana, Calif. Concurrent's new machines contain both solid-state and traditional drives, though Bob Chism, its CTO, guesses that their products will be using only solid-state drives in just another few years.Indeed, many in the solid-state industry talk in triumphalist terms about the ascent of solid-state storage. "I can't imagine in 2015 there being a motor in a storage product," says Al Dei Maggi, VP of marketing at Adtron, another leading solid-state drive maker.Not everyone is as certain. Many people predict that hard-disk drives have a secure medium-term future ahead of them, largely because of the growing importance of multimedia files, especially video, which take up huge amounts of room and which will always be able to be stored more cheaply on hard-disk drives.Indeed, the two will likely coexist. My own plan, as soon as I can afford it, is to have a 64-or-so gigabyte solid-state drive in my home desktop computer, loading my operating system and major applications faster than a hard-disk drive ever could. But there will also be a megacapacity disk drive or three for my data: text files, music, photos and the rest.For consumers, the news with solid-state only gets better. A number of companies are pursuing new approaches to flash that are even speedier than today's technology. And as the solid-state market booms, more manufacturers are jumping into the business. Last week, Intel announced a flash partnership; other big suppliers include Samsung and Toshiba. Price wars seem inevitable.One reason for the current interest in flash by manufacturers is the rapid acceptance of the device in consumer products such as the iPod. They have helped create the demand now drawing new suppliers into the market. So the next time you see someone listening to music on a Nano, thank them for helping hasten the day when computers are faster and more reliable. And you thought they were only ruining their hearing.---Email me at Lee.Gomes@wsj.com.