Researchers have long warned that rapid increases in Internet usage could strain the capacity of the data lines and gear that make up the network, severely slowing traffic and even knocking out service. For years, they've been wrong as Internet-access providers and telecom carriers have added routers and other hardware to keep ahead of demand, and the data-carrying capacity of the Internet pipes has greatly expanded thanks to technical advances.But could the doomsayers be right this time?It depends on whom you ask. Prompting the latest concerns is the rapid growth of bandwidth-hungry applications like online video, file- sharing programs and Internet telephone service. Transmitting a minute of video can require 10 times the bandwidth of audio -- or more, depending on the quality. Already, peer-to-peer video swapping -- most of it illegal -- is estimated to represent in the range of more than one-third of all Internet traffic this year. U.S. Internet video sites alone transmit more data per month than was carried over the entire U.S. Internet backbone monthly in 2000, according to network gear maker Cisco Systems Inc."One of the key possibilities for 2007 is that the Internet could be approaching its capacity," analysts at Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu wrote in a January report. "Our belief is we'll start to see some brownouts or service slowdowns or service issues," says Phil Asmundson, the national managing partner leading Deloitte andamp; Touche USA's Telecommunications practice.But some analysts and Internet companies such as Google Inc. play down the idea that there's an impending crunch, pointing to the forecasters' poor track record of predicting such problems. There are also political implications to the debate. As part of the "network neutrality" scuffle in Washington, telecommunications companies say Internet companies should help foot the bill for more data lines and equipment if they're sending lots of video traffic at high speed to consumersOne issue causing alarm is that access providers often don't have the gear in place to provide the bandwidth they promise to DSL or cable Internet customers. They practice oversubscription in the way airlines overbook planes with the expectation some people will fail to show up. Cable companies are particularly susceptible because their network design shares bandwidth among neighbors, allowing a few Internet users to degrade service by using more than their fair share. Some warn that new applications from start-ups and media companies using peer-to-peer technology to transmit TV shows online could increase any strain if they prove popular.Telephone companies face another challenge. Many own networks that are a hodgepodge of older equipment, much of which is inefficient at handling new forms of traffic like video.There are some other potentially critical spots, such as the points where data traffic from undersea lines and otherbig datapipes converge. Deloitte andamp; Touche's Mr. Asmundson says major Internet hubs could struggle with the increases.Still, many say fears of significant strain are overblown. Eve Griliches, telecom analyst at research firm IDC, says five years ago analysts and engineers voiced concerns, but the result was a surge of innovation. "It feels like we are hyping again," she says. "When we did this before, we found intelligent ways to handle problems with bandwidth."Some of that innovation is now coming from network equipment makers such as Cisco Systems. The San Jose, Calif., company is expected to release new research findings today that predict Internet infrastructure capacity will keep up with traffic for the foreseeable future.Cisco and others are producing new gear aimed at better managing Internet traffic by prioritizing which bits of data are transmitted across the network. That contrasts with older equipment, which fulfilled a more basic task of moving vast amounts of data between countries and cities.In its research, Cisco says consumer video will be responsible for a significant portion of the Internet-based traffic increases from 2006 to 2011, with video streaming and downloads increasing from 9% of all consumer Internet traffic last year to 30% in 2011. But the traffic generally isn't enough to overwhelm service providers, Cisco concludes. Google's YouTube, the most popular U.S. video-sharing site in terms of the number of views, represents only about 4% of North American consumer Internet traffic, it estimates. Network operators and access providers are "staying ahead of the curve," says Paul Bosco, vice president for video and broadband initiatives at Cisco.High-quality video delivered over the Internet to play on TV sets is a major wild card. If consumers begin downloading massive amounts of high-definition movies and TV shows, that could start clogging the so- called last-mile connections to homes.And the large size of such video files means that jams can occur even if not many people are accessing them. About 40 hours of high- definition video represent as much traffic as one million email messages.Vinton Cerf, Google's chief Internet evangelist, says changes in usage will help address the issue. "I believe people will get quite comfortable saying 'I want the following movies to watch,' and there will be systems online that will take care of scheduling and downloading and putting it on your hard drive," he says.Most involved in the debate acknowledge the perils of any predictions. Robert Metcalfe, a venture capitalist at Polaris Venture Partners who helped build the early Internet as an engineer, in a 1995 magazine column warned of a "catastrophic collapse" of the Internet in 1996. He vowed to eat his words if it didn't come to pass.There were some service outages, but Mr. Metcalfe eventually conceded he was wrong. At a 1997 conference, he put his column in a blender with liquid and slurped it down in front of the audience.Today, Mr. Metcalfe thinks online-video traffic could cause slowdowns in Internet service for consumers, but that could lead them to use online video less, resulting in a sort of equilibrium. "I've been talking about the next big Internet thing, 'the video Internet,' for years now," he says. "See -- some of my predictions do come true."