Businesses are creating an ever growing amount of information, all of which has to be stored somewhere and managed by someone.Emerson Electric Co., a global, diversified manufacturing and technology company, has spent the past three years building two new data centers, the giant warehouses of computer equipment that power corporate networks.Steve Hassell, vice president and chief information officer for St. Louis-based Emerson, talked to The Wall Street Journal about why he decided to build these centers, the future of information management, and why going ahead with an IT project isn't always the right thing to do. Here are edited excerpts of that conversation.THE WALL STREET JOURNAL:You recently embarked on abig data-center project. Can you describe what you're doing?MR. HASSELL: We had 135 data centers located around the globe. Two of our largest were co-located [a type of leasing arrangement] and the contracts were coming due. That became the catalyst to step back and look at the entire data-center strategy and decide what to do going forward.It comes down to cost, both near term and over the next 10 to 20 years [which is the life expectancy of a new data center]. You certainly have a lot of control on day one when you do a contract, but it becomes a lot harder to project what things are going to be like 20 years down the road.WSJ: That's more than a lifetime in IT. How do you figure out what your needs will be in 20 years?MR. HASSELL: If we could project what would happen in IT even five years from now it would be a wonderful thing. What you do is identify the things that you can control versus the things that you can design flexibly.If you build your data center, things like real-estate costs become known quantities. If you are in a co-location facility, then the price you pay is going to be dependent on things like real-estate prices in that particular area. So you are taking something from an unknown zone and locking it into place [by building your own space].We decided to build two and then to do co-location for two. We are building a facility in St. Louis and we are refurbishing an existing data center that we had in Marshalltown, Iowa. And we'll have a co-location facility in Singapore and likely one in Europe.WSJ: How much data do you have today, and how much do you anticipate having at the end of the new data centers' life?MR. HASSELL: Today, we're looking at 1.5 petabytes of storage. [A petabyte is a million billion bytes.] If you just take the current growth curves and take it out over 20 years, you get numbers that are absolutely staggering. I believe that at some point there will be some kind of technological shift -- and this is one that I can't predict -- where either there is going to be a storage technology that drops the costs of storage essentially to zero or we will have to get a lot smarter about how we handle storage. The breaking point now is how do you manage all of the data and get productive use out of it. I'm sure that there will be some sort of tool that comes out that helps, but right now it's getting harder and harder to deal with.WSJ: One of the words that we hear a lot in the tech world today is "cloud," which has become an all-purpose word for accessing computing power over the Internet. Did you consider storing your data in the cloud?MR. HASSELL: We did look a lot at the cloud, and what we found is that we're probably not ready yet in terms of our own internal processes. The things that we keep coming back to tend to be more contractual than technical. Everybody is focused on how to get your information into the cloud, but you also need to focus on how do you get your data out, or switch it to another provider. And the mechanisms for doing that right now are pretty young and not well developed. You've got to look at the security of the information and the legalities around the information and who has responsibility for what. It is much more complex than in the old days, when you just had a provider and you gave things to them and they ran it for you.It's a little different now, and it gets a little gray over where responsibility lies. It's maturing very rapidly, and it will be part of the discussion as you go forward. I would be looking at it very differently if I was a start-up. I would probably start up in the cloud and develop that way. But we've been in business for over 100 years and it is difficult to make the change.WSJ: Are you willing to buy from a start-up?MR. HASSELL: Yes, we buy from small companies that are in various phases of starting up all the time. How established the company is weighs into your decision about where to put that technology. I'll use an absurd example, but if someone came out tomorrow with something that will replace servers, you might say let's put that in a lab, let's go see how it develops, but I wouldn't replace my servers. You would be taking too big a risk.An easy call right now is we are working with a local start-up called Global Velocity that has very interesting security technology. But while it's a very useful part of the infrastructure, if something happened to the company you could go and change it out relatively easily.WSJ: How many applications do you run?MR. HASSELL: The estimate we have is 6,800. Some are redundant, of course. Our core philosophy is that there is not one core system and one core business process that will work across all business units. The other thing is that we don't make all the decisions centrally. We control finances and we control human resources and then leave all the other decisions to the individual division. When you do that it is only natural that you will evolve to something that may not be optimal from an application-numbers standpoint. But the idea is that you are making decisions real close to the ultimate customer.WSJ: How do you go about maintaining some degree of centralized control yet at the same time not forcing decisions?MR. HASSELL: We have a process for that. Every year each division puts together an IT operating plan where we look at everything they're doing. We look at what their servers and applications are, but also at their business strategy. We try to look out five years and ask what things they need to accomplish the goals. The Oracle ERP system [software that tracks a range of functions including finance and human resources] is our standard and we want everyone to be moving towards that. The hard part is deciding when to make that shift. You have to look at what the business is doing, you have to look at where the IT system is in its life cycle.WSJ: An ERP system is not just about the software but about changing processes. History is littered with examples of these projects failing in part because of the process change. What is your philosophy about that?MR. HASSELL: ERP projects are re-engineering projects. If the organization is not ready to go and look at their processes, I won't sign the appropriation for the project. The main sign that they are ready -- and it sounds simple, but it's a rule of thumb that I use -- is who is signing the request. It should be [someone from] the business side. If I don't go and see a strong business sponsor and as many business people involved as there are IT people involved, it is a danger sign. If we go and look at the project steering committee and I don't see the president of the division, it's a red flag, because without that they tend to end badly. I also attend the different divisions' planning conferences, and if you don't hear the leadership up there mentioning the ERP system as an enabler to get them where they need to go, then it is a red flag. And if the project is driven by an IT guy who is in love with the toy, it ends badly.WSJ: There's an idea in the tech industry that if you replace an old system with a new one you will increase efficiency and save money. Is that always the case?MR. HASSELL: No. If you think about it, you need to go and look at the total effect of replacing any system, including the disruption it causes along with the benefits. For example, we have some very old [computer-aided design] systems -- in some cases drawing may even be manual. When you look at putting in a brand new three-dimensional CAD system, one of the things that you have to look at is the legacy data that you have. Because in order to use that new system and get all of the efficiencies, you will have to ask yourself what is gong to happen with those legacy data. When you look at the conversion costs, that dwarfs any of the efficiencies that you would get.[With a new system] the engineers may be able to access more information in one place, they are able to do things faster, they are able to go in and create better drawings faster.WSJ: But the efficiency gain isn't worth the cost of the project?MR. HASSELL: That's right. People don't go and look at the real total cost of the IT project. Probably the biggest thing -- and also the hardest to go and put into a spreadsheet, which is why it gets overlooked -- is the business disruption. If an organization has got four or five accountants and in order to put the system in place you need three of them working full time, that's a huge hit for the organization. It's very similar to the old axiom that the cure killed the patient.It's no different than what other business executives do. If you go in and you talk to the COO, he has a constant stream of facilities or manufacturing upgrades that he is managing. It's the same discussion. I just think at times we've mystified it around computers to think that it's somehow different.---Mr. Worthen is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's San Francisco bureau. He can be reached at ben.worthen@wsj.com.Credit: By Ben Worthen