Perhaps it was inevitable, but it looks as if technology companies have found the next best thing to Loudoun County: Prince William County.Lured by bigger tracts of land at cheaper prices and by tax incentives, several technology companies planning to build data centers--bunkerlike buildings that house the guts of telecommunications infrastructure--have passed up Loudoun for the bedroom community to its south.Loudoun is home to several of those centers, which local officials hold up as the ultimate corporate citizens. The millions of dollars worth of computer equipment contributes heavily to the personal- property tax base, but the centers employ few workers and do not add to crowded roads or schools.Now, however, Prince William is becoming a hot zone for data center development, and Loudoun officials have taken note."We're aware that Prince William is incredibly competitive," said Larry Rosenstrauch, head of Loudoun's Department of Economic Development. Prince William "is very anxious to attract these deals and to do what it takes to attract them."Last week, America Online Inc. announced that it would erect a $555 million technology center in Gainesville, its second in Prince William. Days later, a San Jose company announced that it would build an entire campus of centers in the same vicinity at a cost of $800 million.Loudoun has long touted itself as an ideal home for data centers. It has a broad network of fiber optic cable in place, allowing companies to quickly connect their networks to the larger Internet backbone that carries voice and data all over the world. In addition, Loudoun officials worked hard to speed up the permitting process for these centers, which often require a large number of permits. As soon as Loudoun attracted giants such as Exodus Communications Inc. and Equinix Inc., both of California, other companies followed."It's kind of herding mentality," said Lewis E. Shadle, senior vice president of business development for U.S. Data Port, the San Jose company that will build the campus in Prince William. However, "there's nothing golden about Loudoun that drew them."There is something golden about Prince William, however, Shadle said. In addition to a broad fiber network to rival Loudoun's, its personal-property tax rate is about two-thirds lower than that of Fairfax County's or Loudoun's. That means data center companies could save millions of dollars on the taxes they pay on computer equipment.Prince William officials have also proven sensitive to the speed issue, guaranteeing 30-day permitting. "We don't work that way," Rosenstrauch said. "We simply ask for [a company's] schedule and try to work backward to meet it."Even if Loudoun could guarantee 30-day permitting, other factors likely would slow the process of opening a data center in the county, said Chris Epstein, president of DataCentersNow, which operates facilities in Loudoun and Prince William.For one thing, data centers require huge amounts of electricity to operate. A 400,000-square-foot center needs more power than the entire Pentagon, which is 5 million square feet, Epstein said. "In Loudoun, they are quickly running out of power. . . . They've got to build more [power] substations, but they're not easy to build."Rosenstrauch said he believes that there is plenty of power. But he said he thinks Dominion Virginia Power "is scrambling to get the power to these data center customers on their time schedules." Many companies would like to have substations near their sites, but "that's a transaction between the customer and Virginia Power," Rosenstrauch said.Trachtebel Power Inc., of Houston, has said it is considering building a natural gas power plant just outside Leesburg. But a Trachtebel plant--which has drawn heavy opposition from residents and Loudoun County supervisors--would sell to power companies such as Dominion Virginia Power, not to end users such as technology companies.Loudoun officials said the county remains competitive, adding that severalbig datacenter deals could be announced by the end of the year. Rosenstrauch said that as land becomes more scarce in Loudoun, companies naturally would look toward Prince William. However, he said that he has planned a study that will examine data center needs and figure out how to become "the most data center-friendly place around."He said that likely would not extend to offering tax breaks to individual data center companies, as Prince William does. "I think that the Board of Supervisors does not want to be heavily involved in incentives," Rosenstrauch said, adding that offering tax breaks to new companies causes existing businesses to balk.Although Loudoun and other suburban communities are studying ways to attract data centers, Washington is trying to put a moratorium on them. Two weeks ago, the city adopted emergency restrictions requiring data centers to be built underground or submit to a rigorous review to determine their effects on surrounding neighborhoods.Some city officials have expressed concern that a high concentration of the often fortresslike centers would create bland "dead zones" in otherwise vibrant neighborhoods or would take up space that could be used for retail stores.Rosenstrauch said the county's data center study also would examine the downside of these technology hubs.