EVERY school child learns about the mammoths. The largest land animals of their time, they died away, the theory goes, because of a change in the climate that had nourished them. The climate changed but the organisms could not.The lesson here is not just for yesterday and not just for children. The regulated climate that nourished our major airlines has disappeared, and the airlines are now just beginning to adapt to the new climate of deregulation - in fact, howevermuch the industry has changed in recent years, its major changes lie ahead.In the end, the 12 major airlines will need to transform themselves from sprawling, economically inefficient giants into stripped down transportation companies concentrating on the one thing they do best - moving people. This will mean shedding many of the costly activities (ground services, ticketing operations, maintenance) that the airlines assumed in the old climate and developing pricing practices that will provide the profits needed to maintain a first-rate system of air transportation.We all - customers, investors and employees - have a high stake in how well the airlines adjust to the new conditions. If they fail, make no mistake as to the consequences we face: A high probability, almost a certainty, that the airlines will deteriorate into the sort of broken-down transportation system our railways became. And that raises the question of - the word must be uttered - safety.In their youth, the airlines invented a host of functions that transformed air service from a pumpkin into a coach. Take, for example, the airborne toilet (invented by Tony Fokker), which makes long-haul air traffic possible.Once planes were equipped with toilets, the airlines needed ground staff at each station to service them. The airlines still need ground staff, but it no longer has to be their own. At any reasonably busy airport, companies that specialize in ground services (like Butler International) can provide the staff, facilities and investment more efficiently than an airline can, because they make ground service their sole business, spreading costs over a large base.That single example symbolizes what has to be done and why. As a more complicated example, take the contemporary computerized reservations systems. Today, the capabilities of such systems far outrun the requirements of any one airline. Thus, individual airlines need to minimize the investment, operating expenses and the demands on management of state-of-the-art reservations systems by sharing facilities.Gigantic overhaul bases - Eastern's at Miami is one - are another example. These are virtual factories, where airlines come close to rebuilding airframes, engines and component systems. Historically, those great bases evolved to meet a need. But why accept a factory as an embedded cost of business? Why not spin it off as an independent profit-making subsidiary or sell it, and buy overhaul services from a company that, by specializing, uses the facilities more productively.Station functions and facilities, reservations systems, factories, all are candidates for being stripped out of the airlines' innards. Training schools, thebig data-processing systems required for airline accounting and flight kitchens are other candidates. Functions like these, which were once innovative and distinctly subordinate to the basic transportation function, have become rivals to it, big internal businesses.These functions can be compared with the weights hung on race horses as handicaps - for horses, the handicap is measured in weight, for airlines it is measured in costs. Airlines always have relied on new technologies to contain costs and to build business by offering better service. There are radically improved aeronautical technologies in prospect - lifting surfaces, materials, engines and others. There is scant chance of getting them out of the lab and onto the line while airline costs are devouring revenues. A SEVERE additional economic penalty is exacted through the diversion and dilution of top executives' energies. There is a shrieking need for them to be able to dedicate themselves to their primary jobs as airline executives: operating, designing and selling a transportation service; coping with the external environment (like working to improve the airways), and perfecting new pricing policies.For, although stripping to the core is essential to the majors' adaptation, it is not by itself enough. The other essential is the invention of pricing policies that will bring about economic fares that will generate, at the new cost levels, revenues adequate to sustain the acquisition of the new technologies - or even to maintain existing equipment and operations. Here again we must utter the horrid word safety.Despite troubles that have plagued People Express, that enterprise foreshadows the industry to come and offers exactly the right premise for tomorrow's airline: Keep It Simple. Tomorrow's airline will consist of employees focused on the transportation function plus small specialist staffs for such activities as public relations, finance and law.There is no immutable reason why the airlines' restructurings should lead to widespread layoffs. The idea that they must purge themselves does not require applying the Draconian doctrine of today's ''Aztec'' economists who counsel that prosperity can be secured only by sacrificing human beings in wholesale lots. It is unlikely that, at the outset, airline jobs would be replaced on a one-for-one basis, but the conversion involves the realistic prospect that as airlines become more prosperous their suppliers will offer more job opportunities.Nevertheless, the dread prospect of purging the ancient dross will provoke howls of protest from vested interests and from old-fashioned airline executives who still think nothing can be done right unless they do it themselves. Yet, surely the handwriting is already on the wall for those bold enough to read it. The sharing of overhaul bases abroad, the existence of a People Express, the use of outside contractors for meal service, the hiring out by American and United of their reservations systems and, recently, the attempt of the Neutral Industry Booking System Interest Group to latch onto T.W.A.'s reservations system for the shared use of 24 airlines, are all foreshadowings.Yesteryear's managements were often bold and creative in inventing the way today's airlines work. Today's must be as bold in discarding much of their inheritance and as creative in inventing newer ways to make the business grow.And just as you can bet your last kopek that my thesis - that to adapt and prosper the majors must be stripped down to their airline cores -will be denounced as outrageously impractical, you can also bet the two kopeks you win that five years from now the concept will be accepted as conventional wisdom.