LEAD: THE handwritten letters arrive by the fistful. ''Dear Mr. Computer Know-It-All,'' they invariably plead, ''please help. My (wife, husband, daughter, son, pet cockatoo, etc.) is or wants to be a writer and I want to buy (him, her, it) a computer for word processing for Christmas. But what do I buy (him, her, it)?THE handwritten letters arrive by the fistful. ''Dear Mr. Computer Know-It-All,'' they invariably plead, ''please help. My (wife, husband, daughter, son, pet cockatoo, etc.) is or wants to be a writer and I want to buy (him, her, it) a computer for word processing for Christmas. But what do I buy (him, her, it)? I don't want to spend a lot of money. Sincerely yours, Et Cetera. P.S., Your column isn't as funny as it used to be.''Yes, we have been a bit testy lately, mainly because of a certain new computer that Is Breaking Monthly, taking with it, in its latest tantrum, some 10 megabytes of data that had not been backed up. But that's another column.Ahem. Anyway, yes, the nicest thing one can give a writer is a word processor. Computers have had a profound impact on writers and writing. Granted, there are some curmudgeons out there who say that if a goose quill and ink were good enough for Bill Shakespeare, they are good enough for lesser hacks, and that Real Writers Don't Use Silicon. Also, it is true that hand-written letters on good stationery convey much more of a sense of sincerity than do fuzzy dot-matrix printouts with ragged, perforated edges.But for writers who write more than a page a day, a word processor is the most wonderful invention since, well, the typewriter.Word processing is one of the least demanding tasks a computer is called on to handle. Unlike spreadsheets, which require zillions of mathematical calculations, orbig databases, which require lots of disk access, word processors spend most of their time waiting for the writer to do something.So, while spreadsheeters or data basers might get significantly better performance from one of the newest Whizbang Heat-Seeking 386 Mach 50 Superpersonal Computers with Flex-O-Matic Transmission, the average writer can do quite nicely with something a little more sedate, and a lot less expensive. The computer itself isn't as important as the word-processing software. We'll rate some of the software packages next week, but for now let's weigh the iron.Those relatively inexpensive, one-piece writing machines that are advertised as sort of a cross between a typewriter and a computer are just dandy for people who write only short letters and memos. They are easy to learn and simple to operate. Similarly, some of the new typewriters have microprocessors that allow simple editing and spelling correction. But the machines of that type that I have used are simply too slow, and the printed output is of inferior quality. A dear friend has just completed a book manuscript on one such machine, which shows that it can be done. I intend to congratulate her when she is released from the sanitarium.The next step up is a personal computer loaded with word processing software and connected to a dot-matrix printer. For people just getting started, I recommend buying one of the ubiquitous industry-standard XT or AT clones with a monochrome monitor and as much memory as one can afford. The computers are pretty much all the same (except for the new I.B.M. machines, which are not compatible with the industry standard), and oddly enough the deciding factor, at least for me, is often the feel of the keyboard and the look of the monitor. It's subjective. If you don't like the keyboard, you won't want to type. And if the characters on the screen are fuzzy or otherwise distracting, you won't want to spend much time looking into it. The last thing a writer needs is an excuse to avoid writing.As for power, there are two types of computer a serious writer should consider (well, three if one counts the Apple Macintosh, but the Mac is in a category by itself). Of the PC-type computers, the least expensive are based on the 8088 or 8086 chip. If you write as a hobby, this is the chip for you. On the other hand, if you write as a hobby and have lots of money, or if you write professionally, consider spending a little more for a PC based on the 80286 chip.If you choose an 8086-based PC with add-on capability (i.e. expansion slots), the computer can be upgraded later, at additional cost, to run an 80286 chip. Many writers feel they can get along quite nicely with the smaller chip, but they still feel more confident that they can upgrade their trusty old machine if their needs change, or if some wonderful new piece of word processing software is developed that runs only on the 286.The 80286 has all the power you'll ever need (I'll regret that statement in a year, I'm sure). Thus, the nice thing about 286-based machines, for people who have the money, is the freedom from worrying about upgrading later. You buy it, you forget about hardware. If you bought a four-slice toaster instead of a two-slice toaster, you'll understand.Again, many writers may not need the 80286 performance, but it sure is nice. Once you use an 80286, you'll be spoiled.A writer is far more likely to outgrow the computer's memory than the computer's processor. The basic rule is to buy as much memory as you can afford. There are two types of memory to be concerned about: RAM, for random access memory, and storage memory. RAM is pretty much standard these days at 512K or 640K, although some machines offer a megabyte (1,024K) or more. Just a couple of years ago I couldn't imagine ever needing more than 256K, and now I crave several megabytes. Memory is cheap, so go for it. More important for writers is the storage. A hard disk was once considered a luxury, but the cost has fallen so much that it is now highly recommended. Hard disks, also called fixed disks or Winchester drives or other variations thereof, can hold the equivalent of dozens of floppy disks, and can get to that information much faster. Twenty megs seems more than adequate, but hard disks are like garages, and they fill up fast. Buy more if you can afford it. You can put a novel on a hard disk with plenty of room to spare.If all you do is write, get a monochrome (one-color) monitor. Color monitors cost more, but in general they don't display text with the same clarity as monochrome monitors. Some of the newer, more expensive color monitors are very good, though. Again, try them out to see how they look.One of the insidious things about word processors is that they tend to encourage long-winded writing. For example, there is no room left this week to talk about software, or printers, or systems for hard-core writers. More next week.