LEAD: With the Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index up almost 29 percent so far in 1989, calculated for total return, many small investors would like to share in those gains, but they are afraid of the market's risk. The answer, financial advisers say, is professional management, and for most that means mutual funds of both bonds and equities.With the Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index up almost 29 percent so far in 1989, calculated for total return, many small investors would like to share in those gains, but they are afraid of the market's risk. The answer, financial advisers say, is professional management, and for most that means mutual funds of both bonds and equities.''People who are underinvested in equities should be back in the market'' and stay there for the long-term, said Sheldon Jacobs, the editor of the No-Load Fund Investor, a newsletter. ''Many people suffer from 'C.D.-itis' - they buy C.D.'s because they are insured.'' But what they need, he contended, is not insurance against a big bank's going under, but a market rate of return on their money.''We could get a small correction at any time,'' he acknowledged. So it is best to invest in ''all-weather funds that could ride out a significant correction - don't buy the most volatile aggressive funds.''For a pre-retirement portfolio, Mr. Jacobs recommends 50 percent equities, 30 percent bonds and 20 percent cash. For retired people he would shift 10 percent to bonds from stocks, and for younger people in the ''wealth-building'' years he advises 60 percent equities and 40 percent cash.Portfolios should include at least 4 or 5 funds, he said, and possibly 10 or 12. He likes the Janus Group's Janus Fund and Janus 20 Fund; the Vanguard Group's Windsor II, Wellington and Wellesley funds; T. Rowe Price's Equity Income Fund and Financial Programs' Industrial Income and Strategic European funds.And there are many other good funds on the market. Following are interviews with managers of three relatively new no-load funds that have outperformed the market this year. New America Growth FundJohn H. Laporte, manager of T. Rowe Price's New Horizon Fund, began the New America Growth Fund in late 1985 to invest in the service sector. So far this year it has climbed 40 percent on a total-return basis.''The service sector of the market has done better than the manufacturing sector,'' Mr. Laporte said, adding that services are a lot less volatile than manufacturing, ''which has borne the brunt of any cyclical declines.''He views the service sector as ''a durable investment concept'' that should continue its strong performance for ''5 to 10 years anyway.'' One-fifth of the fund's assets are invested in media-communications services. Other holdings are in retail-specialty merchandisers and business, financial and waste-disposal services. The biggest single stake, 3.8 percent, is in Tele-Communications. Other big holdings include Metro Mobile CTS, MCI Communications, Toys 'R' Us, Telecredit, Waste Management and H andamp; R Block. Janus Flexible Income FundMichael E. McGoldrick, senior vice president of Janus Capital, says he has his own retirement money, as well as that of his parents, in the Flexible Income Fund, which he set up two years ago to give Denver-based Janus a fixed-income fund.Emphasizing the fund's conservative nature, he said it had an 18-year average maturity and an ''enormous variety of holdings.'' It is always fully invested, with about two-thirds in American corporate bonds. Convertible bonds represent 10 percent, and issues denominated in pounds, marks, yen and pesetas represent close to 10 percent. Other investments include Treasury issues, index-linked bonds and corporate notes. He uses options to hedge positions.''The goal is to achieve maximum total return with very low volatility,'' Mr. McGoldrick said, warning that investors in fixed-income funds should always look at total return, which includes appreciation and dividends, not at distribution numbers, which are misleading because they include a return of principal.So far this year, he said, his volatility has been well below that of Treasury issues, while the return has been better. In the last 12 months, he added, total return has been 14.29 percent. Fidelity Disciplined Equity FundBrad Lewis, manager of the Fidelity Disciplined Equity Fund, which the big Boston-based fund group began on Dec. 28, has chalked up a 34.3 percent total return so far this year, while keeping volatility below that of the S.andamp;P. stock index - 0.58 percent a day on a standard deviation basis versus 0.73 percent a day for the index.He has done this, he said, by adhering to ''investment disciplines that have worked over time and keeping my emotions out of it.'' He called the fund Fidelity's ''most conservative growth fund or most aggressive income-growth fund.'' Its holdings include I.B.M., Bell Atlantic, Amerada Hess, Chips and Technologies and Bank of Boston.He uses a ''souped-up 386 computer'' that works through the night producing a 45-page printout. It screens abig database of stocks and uses algorithms to evaluate them, relying on a dozen criteria including price-earnings ratios, cash flow and growth estimates. Then during the day he checks into the buy signals generated by the model.Mr. Lewis's goal is to put together a string of game-winning singles. ''I'll miss the turnaround and asset play,'' he said, ''but I'll also miss the craters.''