Theodore J. Leonsis knew something was wrong late last month when during a two-day period, the constant stream of electronic messages from Stephen M. Case, his boss and the chief executive of America Online, came to an abrupt stop.''It was radio silence,'' Mr. Leonsis recalled last week. ''That means something was troubling him.''Eventually, on Jan. 29, Mr. Leonsis, who was in New York to start America Online's new entertainment guide service, got a call from Mr. Case, who said that he was having doubts about a deal that had been in the works for more than a year. The plan was to spin off to outside investors part of the AOL Studios unit that Mr. Leonsis runs. Moreover, Mr. Case told Mr. Leonsis to have a talk with Robert W. Pittman, who as the executive in charge of AOL Networks, the main on-line service, was Mr. Leonsis' peer.At a lunch in New York that afternoon, Mr. Pittman explained that the company wanted to absorb, rather than spin off, the studio unit. ''Wouldn't you like to play a bigger role in the mother ship?'' Mr. Leonsis recalls Mr. Pittman asking.A week later, America Online said that Mr. Pittman had been promoted to chief operating officer. Mr. Leonsis now reports to him.Mr. Case's sudden about-face on whether Studios should be spun off and how the company's management should be organized were but two in a series of hairpin turns -- including changing his entire business plan -- on the road America Online has followed to its domination of cyberspace. Shy, awkward, occasionally not focused, Mr. Case is hardly the classic master manager. But his instinct about what people want from an on-line service proved to be right often enough to outmaneuver the likes of I.B.M., the News Corporation, Compuserve, ATandamp;T and even Microsoft.Most important, perhaps, Mr. Case, 39, has attracted a group of eccentric, flamboyant executives very different from himself, who contribute key skills that Mr. Case lacks. Mr. Leonsis, 42, who joined the company in 1994, is the gregarious entrepreneur who proclaimed that America Online was not so much a glorified CB radio for geeks as it was show business. Mr. Pittman, 44, the founder of MTV, brought a mature marketing vision -- that America Online needed to think of itself as a major national brand -- as well as traditional bottom-line values.''You can't talk to Ted without talking about content,'' said Robert Frankenberg, the former chief executive of Novell and a member of America Online's board. ''Steve is the one asking what the member experience is like. And Bob asks, 'How do we make money off this?' ''Profits have been scarce for the company, as the costs of luring new customers and paying the 7,500 of its 9,500 employees who answer their questions has outstripped its rapidly growing revenue. In the last three months of 1997, America Online earned $20.8 million on sales of $592 million.The value of its stock has tripled in a year; it closed Friday at $114.25.Most significantly, the company's advertising revenue nearly doubled from a year ago and now represents 18 percent of total revenue. Mr. Case wants advertising and subscriber fees to represent half the company's sales.Together, the three, but especially Mr. Pittman, navigated treacherous waters a year ago, when headlines blared that customers could not connect to the service. In 1997, it signed up 2.9 million new customers, more than all its competitors combined. Its 11 million members now spend 250 million hours a month on line, flirting, trading stock tips, complaining about computer bugs, surfing the World Wide Web and, increasingly, buying things.Of course, victory in cyberspace can be enjoyed for a nanosecond or two. In many ways, America Online is still a gangling adolescent stumbling toward maturity after an especially awkward growth spurt. Littered along its path of experimentation and self-discovery are dozens of discarded postures, philosophies and wounded partners.At first, the company sponsored entrepreneurial partners who developed creative programming. Now, it wants to own its programming.Last year, the company bid to buy all of Compuserve, including itsbig datanetwork. Abruptly, Mr. Case decided to sell America Online's own data network and buy only Compuserve's on-line service.For years, America Online made money by charging an hourly connection fee. A year and a half ago, it went to a $19.95 flat monthly fee, changing the focus of its business plan to advertising. Last Monday, the company increased the rate to $21.95.''Our strategy has been in place for more than a decade,'' Mr. Case said in his office in a lofty former warehouse here, his moccasin-clad feet propped on a nearby chair. ''The goal has always been to build a mass medium that is as important in everyday life as the telephone or television. How we execute the strategy has always been in flux.''Mr. Case shares the youthful class-nerd look of Microsoft's chairman, William H. Gates. But if Mr. Gates is the math jock who let everyone know that his differential equations were more complex than theirs, Mr. Case seems more the wallflower and eager to be liked.What he knew -- and what no one else, not even Microsoft, saw as clearly -- was that the most important use of an on-line service was for people to communicate through E-mail, chat rooms and, more recently, the hugely popular instant messages that users can send directly to their friends' screens. Mr. Case also encouraged the tendency of his customers to say immediately and stridently what they thought of the service. Now a staff of two dozen people read his E-mail.Mr. Leonsis came aboard when America Online acquired Redgate Communication, a company he had founded, in an ill-fated attempt to offer shopping catalogues on CD-ROM's. The consummate idea-a-minute entrepreneur, Mr. Leonsis set out to add pizazz to the on-line experience.''A lot of people think outside the box; Ted lives outside the box,'' said Kenneth J. Orton, chief executive of Preview Travel, an on-line service in which America Online has a stake. )''It was an insane free for all,'' said one executive Mr. Leonsis hired. ''People were literally running down the hallways from meeting to meeting trying to keep up. Kids barely out of graduate school were running multimillion-dollar divisions.''During this period, America Online developed a reputation as a very difficult company to do business with. One company executive tells of flying to Virginia to meet with Mr. Leonsis five times and having every appointment canceled. ''The place was the Wild West,'' said a publisher who provided content for America Online at the time.Then in October 1996, Mr. Pittman, already a board member, strode into town, aiming to lay down the law. The busy-signal crisis hit almost immediately, and he circled the wagons, while organizing a huge effort to install half a million modems.''I told people I was Robin Hood,'' Mr. Pittman said. ''I would rob from someone else to get you what you needed.'' The cash shortage that ensued prompted Mr. Leonsis to seek investors for the Studio division.Eventually, the busy signals subsided, and Mr. Pittman began to try to tame the chaos in the company. ''Dealing with AOL, you had the feeling of a bunch of kids playing at business,'' said the head of one of the service's content providers. ''Pittman is their first adult supervision.''Playing the grown-up was a change for Mr. Pittman, who had built a career as a boy wonder. Never finishing college, he became program manager of WNBC in New York before the age of 25, and then went on to MTV. He still collects motorcycles, flies airplanes and hunts wild boar.But Mr. Pittman was far more disciplined than he seemed, say those who have worked with him. ''Bob always referred to himself as a sociology student looking at consumer trends,'' said Mayo S. Stuntz Jr., who worked for Mr. Pittman at MTV. ''He was one of the first analytical programmers, using very sophisticated political research techniques to understand the market and guide the programming.''''When I first got here, I scared them,'' Mr. Pittman said of America Online's middle-level executives, ''because I looked at the numbers so much.'' The number that Mr. Pittman stared at most was how much it cost for the ''carpet bombing'' mailings of sign-up disks for the on-line service. Mr. Pitman cut back sharply, figuring that the service's brand would bring in customers.He was right. The cost of signing up one new customer, after covering for the frequent defections, has fallen to $77 from $375 in 1996. (America Online has stopped releasing the actual percentage of customers who cancel service. Analysts estimate the churn rate -- the ratio of people who cancel the service after the free trial or in the next two months -- has fallen from 75 percent to 40 percent.)While Mr. Pittman was making disks less ubiquitous, he also dumped the slogan ''The Future. Available now.'' Mr. Pittman assumed that the reason people went on line was to save time, be it for socializing or shopping. And the reason they chose America Online was that it was easy to use. Mr. Pittman's new campaign was more straightforward: ''So easy, no wonder it's No. 1.''Further, with the sale of its data network to Worldcom Inc., Mr. Pittman was able to cut the company's cost of connecting a member to 45 cents an hour from 90 cents an hour.With subscriber fees then capped at $19.95, the most important number Mr. Pittman looked at was advertising revenue, mainly from exclusive deals with companies that wanted to sell things to America Online's growing and very affluent members. Setting the tone, he got a little-known telephone company, Tel-Save, to pay $100 million up front, plus ongoing commissions, for the right to be the exclusive purveyor of long-distance on the service. Other big deals followed for sellers of books, flowers, music and the like. He also started charging independent publishers -- partners whom the service had once tried to nurture -- hefty fees for prominent promotion of their sites.These changes have pleased big advertisers and publishers but have left smaller players frustrated -- and users have not been shy in voicing displeasure about increased advertising. Dissatisfaction with the company is reflected in myriad anti-AOL Web sites, mailing lists and several class-action lawsuits, both from disgruntled consumers and from publishers. Last year, the company settled an action by a group of state attorneys general, offering refunds to customers who could not connect to its service.Mr. Pittman says America Online's position leading the charge into an unknown future makes it a lightning rod for criticism and that ultimately most users will forgive these imperfections. ''This is America, and brands win,'' he said.On the company's executive floor, Mr. Pittman's radical changes appear to be taking hold because Mr. Case welcomes the help. ''Bob is a better day-to-day manager than I am,'' Mr. Case said. ''He has a better sense of the financial implications of things. I, because I have been doing this for so long, have a deeper sense of what members want.''Mr. Case now says he wants to devote himself more to policy issues and future strategy to take advantage of new technology like high-speed cable modems and Internet appliances like WebTV.The toughest battle for America Online now, analysts say, is in the office, where services like Yahoo have a big lead. America Online is preparing improved features for the currently bland AOL.COM Web site (www.aol.com). Yahoo, meanwhile, has joined with MCI to turn its search service into something more akin to America Online's total-programming package.As for Mr. Leonsis, ''I'm not crushed,'' he said last week of his new role working for Mr. Pittman. ''It means I was right that content is so important it has to stay with the main company.''Still, he is clearly sensitive to his change in status. As Mr. Leonsis wandered last week onto a balcony to have his picture taken with Mr. Pittman and Mr. Case, he pointed to two construction trailers on a parking lot next to the company's vast new computer center across the street.''There are the new offices of Studios,'' he joked. ''But don't you worry. A year from now, that will be a skyscraper.''Theodore J. Leonsis, left, Stephen M. Case and Robert W. Pittman have helped guide America Online. (Justin Lane for The New York Times)Each services' share of online time spent by users at home.America Online -- 58%Other services -- 38%Prodigy Classic -- 2.3%Compuserve -- 1.1%Microsoft Network -- 0.6%Graph tracks number of AOL subscribers at the end of each year, 1992-1997. (Sources: Media Metrix Inc. (online time); America Online (subscribers))(pg. D1)''Who Are the Users?''Statistics about America Online users who access the service from home.SEXMALE -- 54%FEMALE -- 47%AGEYOUNGER THAN 18 -- 20%18-24 -- 7%25-34 -- 21%35-44 -- 25%45-54 -- 16%55 AND OLDER -- 11%HOUSEHOLD INCOMELESS THAN $20,000 -- 7%$20,000-$40,000 -- 18%$40,000-$60,000 -- 25%$60,000-$100,000 -- 34%MORE THAN $100,000 -- 16%NUMBER IN HOUSEHOLDONE -- 12%TWO -- 24%THREE TO FOUR -- 45%MORE THAN FIVE -- 19%EDUCATION OF HEAD OF HOUSEHOLDLESS THAN HIGH SCHOOL -- 3%HIGH SCHOOL -- 47%COLLEGE -- 30%POST GRADUATE -- 17%DATA NOT AVAIL. -- 3%TIME SPENT ONLINE FOR ALL USERSAOL CONTENT -- 40%CHAT ROOMS -- 20%E-MAIL -- 23%WORLD WIDE WEB -- 17%NOTE: Figures may not add up to 100 percent because of rounding.(Sources: America Online (time spent online); Media Metrix Inc. (all other categories))(pg. D8)Graph tracks AOL stock price since 1992:March 19, 1992America Online makes initial public stock offering.May 11, 1994AOL buys Redgate Communications. Its founder, Theodore J. Leonsis, joins AOL management.Oct. 29, 1996AOL announces pricing plan: unlimited use for $19.95. Robert W. Pittman hired to run AOL's main on-line service.Dec. 1, 1996Unlimited-use pricing starts.Jan. 20, 1998Number of subscribers hits 11 million.FridayStock closes at $114.25 per share.(Sources: Bloomberg Financial Markets (stock price); America Online (subscribers, average time spent))(pg. D8)''Revenue Growth'' tracks figures from online service subscriptions and from other revenue, for the fiscal years ending June 30, 1992-1997. (Source: America Online)(pg. D8)