You've read the books. You may even see the movie. Now, behold the stock.For months now, the phenomenon of the publishing world has been Harry Potter, the magical English schoolboy chronicled in three best-selling fiction books that currently occupy the three top slots on the New York Times best-seller list -- with a staggering five million hard-cover and three million paperbacks in print in the United States alone. Since 1997, additionally, the books have sold 2.2 million copies in the English-speaking world outside the United States, from Britain to Canada to Australia, making them best sellers from London to Melbourne.Beneath this well-publicized literary storm, though, there is another, less-told tale of publishing near misses and a shrewd call by a medium-size British house, Bloomsbury Publishing P.L.C., which not only brought Harry Potter into print but has also brought investors flocking to its stock.After other publishers passed up the adventures of the tousle-haired schoolboy wizard, Bloomsbury was the first book publisher on either side of the Atlantic to seize on the stories and their creator, J. K. Rowling.And the stock market, not known for literary sensitivity, has fallen under the spell. First floated on the London Stock Exchange in 1994 at 105 pence, Bloomsbury shares had languished within a few pence of that price ever since -- until last spring. Then the Harry Potter phenomenon gathered steam, and Bloomsbury's shares took off like Harry's magic broomstick, closing on Friday at 456.5 pence ($7.62), a 176 percent rise since April 30.Not bad results from an initial investment of $3,300 in 1996, which is the advance Bloomsbury paid for the first Harry Potter book, published the following year as ''Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone.'' Who could have predicted back then that by the time ''Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban,'' the third book in the series, went on sale in Britain last July, just before school vacation, booksellers would feel compelled to delay the released until 3:45 P.M. so that children would not play hooky to snap up the first editions.Although the greater marketing might of the publisher of the United States editions, the Scholastic Corporation, has undoubtedly helped stoke Potter fever, Bloomsbury has benefited from being able to release the British editions a few months before the American versions. Many American children and their parents, in fact, know Harry and his fellow students at the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry from the British versions they have bought over the Internet -- books that use different art, different typography and in some cases different spelling and vocabulary than their American cousins. (With the first book, for example, the ''Philosopher's Stone'' in the British title was changed to ''Sorcerer's Stone,'' for the American release.)Bloomsbury, with annual revenue last year of less than $25 million, is but a fraction the size of Scholastic, which had sales of more than $1.1 billion last year. And Scholastic's stock price has shown scant sign of a Potter levitation; the shares, which closed on Friday at $47.94, are actually below their high for the year of $58.75 on Jan. 6.But for Bloomsbury, the series' runaway success has been nothing less than a coup -- for the editors who first spotted Ms. Rowling's talent, and for the company's 44-year-old chief executive, Nigel Newton. It was Mr. Newton who set up Bloomsbury with four partners and $2.65 million in venture capital just 13 years ago and has since advanced steadily in the staid world of British publishing.Quite apart from publishing the Harry Potter series, Mr. Newton, a dual citizen of Britain and the United States, has helped created another potential money-spinner: the Encarta World English Dictionary, produced with the software giant Microsoft. Mr. Newton approached Microsoft in 1991, proposing a joint CD-ROM and bound-book dictionary project. The $48 book version, which Bloomsbury released in August, has already sold 400,000 copies, according to the company, which expects the dictionary to generate some $68 million in sales over the next decade.Mr. Newton's bold, entrepreneurial management style has won him strong support from the institutional investors that hold about a quarter of Bloomsbury's shares, according to Louise Barton, a media analyst with the brokerage firm of Investec Henderson Crosthwaite. ''They could be vulnerable'' to a takeover, Ms. Barton said, ''but there would be strong support for the management from the institutions.''Written partly in cafes when the author, Ms. Rowling, was on welfare as a single mother, the first book in the Harry Potter series was initially rejected by a series of leading British publishing houses. In fact, Ms. Rowling had trouble even finding an agent to represent her.''She sent three chapters,'' Christopher Little, her agent, recalled of her over-the-transom submission in 1995. ''We don't do children's books, so it was lying in the slush pile. It must have been at the top because you pick up from the top. And so it got read. There was something that was so exciting that we wanted her on an exclusive basis.''Even with Mr. Little representing the book, though, at least four more major British publishers rejected it. Then, an editor at Bloomsbury scanned the opening page and began to read on, passing chapters as they were read to colleagues around the office. The company made its offer the next day.The feeling, Mr. Newton said, was that ''we have just bought the most extraordinary book.''In the United States, where Ms. Rowling is currently on a book-signing tour that is drawing crowds of children and adults, more than a half-dozen publishers joined the bidding when Mr. Little offered the first book to American publishers in 1997, after it was released in Britain. Scholastic's Levine/Scholastic imprint beat out a group that included Hyperion, Putnam and Random House with a bid of $105,000.Jean Feiwel, publisher of the Scholastic Book Group in New York, recalled the gamble: ''The auction went pretty high for a book that was going well in England but hadn't broken any box-office records. And it wasn't clear that the success would translate across the ocean.''Time Warner's Warner Brothers, meanwhile, signed a separate deal for an unspecified amount for movie and merchandising rights. The film is set to appear in 2001. Ms. Rowling herself has said she will produce a book a year until the series is complete -- seven books, one for each of Harry's years at the Hogwarts boarding school, with the next one due out next July.Both Bloomsbury and Scholastic say they expect to publish the entire series, although neither would disclose its financial arrangements with Ms. Rowling. But already, Mr. Little said, the book's earnings for the author are ''well into the seven figures, not yet in eight figures.'' And, with four more books in the offing, some critics have forecast that the tales will enter the pantheon of children's books alongside the works of C. S. Lewis and other enduring classics.Arthur A. Levine, the Scholastic editor whose imprint is publishing the American Harry Potter editions, sees their success as ''the combination of a really great book getting a lot of attention and that's magic; even in this day and age, that can drive a business success.''''But it's not marketing magic,'' Mr. Levine said. ''It's the magic of writing and the magic of reading.''For Bloomsbury, meanwhile, even if the Harry Potter publicity blizzard has obscured some of Bloomsbury's other achievements, the breakthrough has reinforced Mr. Newton's stated belief: In an age when book publishing is often an appendage of a media leviathan, there remains a place for smaller, independent outfits focused on literary fiction and reference works.''Publishing is still a human-scale activity, no matter how large an entity you create around it,'' said Mr. Newton, whose company is based in an 18th-century house in London's raffish Soho district. ''So there's a very good argument for publishing being done by units that combine the sort of clout that we do have as publishers with flexibility, speed of decision making and the lack of bureaucratic layers.''Mr. Newton grew up in San Francisco, the son of an English father and American mother. He came to Britain at age 18 as an undergraduate at Cambridge University and has lived here virtually ever since. He worked in publishing at Macmillian and then Sidgwick andamp; Jackson before starting Bloomsbury at the age of 31, where he scored an early success with Scott Turow's ''Presumed Innocent.''And he has been quick to embrace the trans-Atlantic, digital age -- not only with the Microsoft deal but also with an on-line book-selling service, Bloomsbury.com, and plans for a United States subsidiary, Bloomsbury USA.And what has all this meant for Bloomsbury's balance sheet?Earlier this month the company released figures for the first half of the year -- traditionally the least profitable period for publishers -- showing that it had narrowed its losses to $169,000, compared with a loss of $539,000 in last year's first half. First-half sales of $10.56 million were up 30 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.The recent figures included the amortization of costs relating to some of the $4.62 million outlays from the Encarta deal with Microsoft and the development of two otherbig database projects the company is keeping under wraps.Significantly, the first-half figures did not include the success of the third Harry Potter book, which was published in Britain on July 8 and released in the United States last month.Analysts now expect Bloomsbury to record a pretax profit for this calendar year of more than $4.1 million on sales of $29.7 million. That will include the year-end holiday season, when Mr. Newton is predicting huge sales, which he said he hoped would be buoyed by special cloth-bound editions of the Harry Potter books that are to retail for around $30 each, compared with about $18 for the current cardboard hard covers.Of course, the company is not solely dependent on Ms. Rowling. It has published best-selling work in Britain by pedigreed authors who include Nadine Gordimer, Michael Ondaatje, Margaret Atwood, David Guterson, Joanna Trollope, John Irving and Anna Pavord.''Our interest is literary fiction and that's what we publish,'' Mr. Newton said. ''And if you examine the best-seller lists of the past three years, it's quite clear that literary fiction is at the top of the heap.''Ms. Barton, the Investec analyst, said Bloomsbury's stable of authors, as well as its Microsoft Encarta venture and other data base projects, would attract investors over the next few years. She rates the stock a buy. ''Harry Potter is only one factor,'' she said, but ''it's a high-profile factor.''''The City likes visibility,'' she said, referring to London's financial district.And no one is pretending that so much visibility -- buzz might be an even better word -- would have come to the company without that upstart wizard, Harry Potter.Nigel Newton, the chief executive of Bloomsbury Publishing, bought the Harry Potter series after several other houses passed on it. (Axel Seidemann for The New York Times)''Literary Markets''Bloomsbury Publishing's stock price has soared this year on the strength of the Harry Potter book series. Graph tracks daily closing stock price this year. Friday's close: 456.5 pence, up 11.5 pence. (Source: Bloomberg Financial Markets)