I GOT a little jittery upon hearing that the Social Security numbers and other personal data of 26.5 million veterans were stolen last month.Of course abig dataheist makes everyone edgy, but I had particular reasons to be anxious. Not only was some of my own data stolen last year -- when thieves gained access to my account and swiped over $1,700 -- but I haven't kept monitoring the situation as I should have. If you suspect that your personal data might have fallen into criminal hands, it's imperative to monitor your own financial security as consistently as possible.First, get copies of your credit report regularly. ''Your credit report is probably your best source for early warning signs of identity theft,'' said Evan Hendricks, author of ''Credit Scores andamp; Credit Reports: How the System Really Works, What You Can Do'' (Privacy Times, 2004).Each person is entitled to one free copy of his or her credit report a year, from each of the three credit reporting agencies. While a number of Web sites advertise free reports, the dedicated Web site set up by the agencies under the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act is AnnualCreditReport.com.Travis Plunkett, legislative director of the Consumer Federation of America, says to beware of commercial Web sites promoting free reports, because ''they lure you in and then try to sell you other expensive services,'' like credit monitoring. ''We generally think these are a poor value.''Mr. Hendricks added that ordering your reports online from AnnualCreditReport.com may result in some glitches, and it's best to call the toll-free number (877) 322-8228.Once you have your credit report -- some experts suggest ordering one from each bureau every few months, rather than all three at once -- start at the ''Inquiries'' section, usually at the end. This is where you can see who has requested copies of your report and why. ''If you live in New York and see that the Best Buy in Phoenix has pulled your credit report, that's a red flag,'' he said.An inquiry doesn't mean an account was opened in your name, ''but you should contact the retailer or creditor immediately.'' If someone did open an account, you want to know so you can file a police report.Some inquiries might be labeled ''AR'', which could indicate a routine account review of one of your existing loans or credit cards, Mr. Hendricks added. ''If you don't have an account with that institution, you should call them,'' he said.When you turn to your credit history, you'll see a list of all your accounts, past and present, and there will be a list of your past and present addresses in the identification section. Again, look for glaring errors -- an account with a store where you've never shopped, a place you've never lived -- but don't panic. According to a 2004 study by the United States Public Research Interest Group, 79 percent of credit reports contained some erroneous information.If there is an account or address you want to dispute, make sure you register a complaint with both the credit bureau and the creditor. ''The law says that the credit bureau has 30 days to verify the information or take it off the report,'' Mr. Hendricks said. Make sure you get the free follow-up report you're entitled to -- they won't send you one unless you ask, as I discovered myself last year.Finally, the most powerful step you can take to protect yourself is to put what's known as a ''freeze'' on your credit report. Seventeen states have active or soon-to-be active provisions in place, said Gail Hillebrand, senior lawyer with Consumers Union, and most of them give any consumer, not just identity-theft victims, this option.A freeze will not hurt your credit score; it simply blocks anyone but you from opening an account in your name. Only you can request that the freeze be lifted when, say, you want to take out a loan or mortgage, said Ms. Hillebrand, who last week urged the Veterans Administration to make the freeze option known to all veterans whose data was stolen.To find out whether a freeze is available in your state, check www.financialprivacynow.org.All of this amounts to a lot of work. ''The credit bureaus make it as cumbersome as possible for consumers,'' Mr. Plunkett said. Still, doing it is a lot more effective than crossing your fingers and hoping your data is safe, as I've been doing for the last year.