EASY COME, UNTIL RECENTLY -- Just as the technology boom of the late 1990s turned twenty-something programmers into dot-com billionaires, the explosive growth in subprime lending in recent years turned mortgage bankers and brokers across the country into multimillionaires seemingly overnight. [Page C1.]A RUSH TO SPRING AHEAD -- Daylight saving time begins Sunday, three weeks earlier than usual, and many companies are scrambling to reset BlackBerry e-mail devices, desktop PCs andbig data-center computers. [C1.]LOBBYING FOR HIGH STAKES -- Alfonse M. D'Amato, the former Republican senator from New York, is a longtime poker fan who plays regularly in high-stakes game. But the stakes got even higher last week when he signed a lobbying deal with the Poker Players Alliance, which hopes that he can help them overturn a federal ban on Internet gambling -- or at least exempt poker from its provisions. [C1.]THREE DAYS TO CHANGE THE WORLD -- More than 1,000 people -- including Nobel laureates, entrepreneurs and entertainers -- will gather in Monterey, Calif., this week for the annual TED conference, named for the convergence of technology, entertainment and design. [C1.]THE MANY FATHERS OF MP3 -- Microsoft paid a German rights holder $16 million to license the MP3 audio format, the foundation of the digital music boom. But an American jury decided that Microsoft had failed to pay another MP3 patent holder, and issued a $1.52 billion judgment. And the MP3 toll gates do not end there. [C3.]ONLINE SEARCH FOR IN-STORE ITEMS -- Technology companies are poised to solve the problem of finding items at the mall, via cellphone or personal digital assistant. One company is NearbyNow, whose chief executive, Scott Dunlap, above, says more than 2,000 shoppers used its service at a California mall on the first day of a trial. E-Commerce Report: Bob Tedeschi. [C8.]A FICTION AT WIKIPEDIA -- Contributors to Wikipedia, the popular online encyclopedia, have turned against one of their own who was found to have created an elaborate false identity. [C5.]MEDIA DISPUTE CUTS TV SERIES -- A dispute between British Sky Broadcasting and Virgin Media has left 3.3 million cable television viewers without ''Lost,'' ''The Simpsons'' and other popular American series. [C5 .]COKE V. COKE, IN COMMERCIALS -- The Coca-Cola Company is updating the make-fun-of-lawyers shtick for new generations in a nontraditional campaign for Coke Zero. Advertising: Stuart Elliott. [C7.]HEALTH SERVICES BY CELLPHONE -- Rwanda is using a system built by a United States company to track H.I.V. and AIDS patients, manage drug supplies and monitor health programs by cellphone in a country where travel is difficult. [C8.]KIDZ BOP 11 RISES IN CHARTS -- Kidz Bop 11, released by Razor andamp; Tie on Feb. 20, became a best seller in the children's music category in its first week and has captured the No. 4 spot among top music albums. Most Wanted. [C9.]BITE-SIZE NEWS -- The Philadelphia Inquirer and its sister paper, The Daily News, are offering digests that look like Web sites, with quick summaries of news articles as well as sports scores, lottery numbers and the weather -- pretty much all one needs to read. [C5.]NBC ANCHOR IN BAGHDAD -- Brian Williams, the NBC news anchor, is in Baghdad, the first network news anchor to travel there since Bob Woodruff, then the co-anchor of ABC News, was severely injured by a roadside bomb in January 2006. [C5.]LURING GAME DEVELOPERS -- Microsoft plans to announce a contest that will award $10,000 to the developer of the next great digital diversion for the company's Xbox 360. [C5.]BUYOUT FIRMS WORK ON IMAGE -- Under attack by politicians who call them ''locusts'' and union leaders who accuse them of cutting jobs, European private equity firms are trying to salvage their reputations. [C2.]Photos