Author: Jerry A. DiColoNEW YORK--Crude futures settled higher, the first rise in four trading days, on the eve of the Federal Reserve's latest monetary policy meeting.Light, sweet crude for September delivery settled 78 cents, or 1%, higher at $81.48 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange, bouncing back from a 1.6% drop Friday. Brent crude on the ICE futures exchange settled 83 cents higher at $80.99 a barrel.Oil prices held above $81 for most of the session as traders await signals on whether the Fed will adopt new measures to stimulate the U.S. economy.A weak employment report Friday renewed fears about the slowing recovery, a worrying sign for oil markets concerned that supplies will remain at high levels without a growing economy to spur demand. But the report has ignited speculation that the Fed, during its meeting Tuesday, could revive its purchases of Treasury bonds or mortgage-backed securities to stimulate growth."Thebig datapeople are waiting for what happens in the Fed statements tomorrow," said Jason Schenker, an analyst with Prestige Economics. "After employment numbers Friday, traders are just looking forward to the next big piece of data."On Friday, the Labor Department said the U.S. economy in July lost 131,000 jobs, the second consecutive monthly drop and the latest reminder that the recovery remains fragile. But oil, despite sliding to one-week lows, settled Friday at $80.70, above the important $80 a barrel level that had contained prices for several weeks.Mixed economic data had kept crude contained between $70 and $80 a barrel since May, with prices following the equities markets as a proxy for future economic growth. Now, market watchers are divided on whether crude prices can hold above $80 amid worries about high supplies and sluggish demand.Higher equities helped support crude gains Monday, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average up 45 points at 10699 in 4 p.m. trading.Still, market watchers remain cautious ahead of the Fed meeting and weekly oil supply data from the Department of Energy due Wednesday that are expected to show a drop in crude stockpiles, according to a survey of analysts conducted by Dow Jones Newswires."Today it's really been the calm before the storm," said Matt Smith, an analyst with Summit Energy.Crude supplies are expected to drop by 1.8 million barrels, while gasoline inventories are seen falling by 300,000 barrels, according to the mean of six analysts' estimates. Distillates, which include heating oil and diesel fuel, are expected to rise by 1.3 million barrels.Meanwhile, the National Hurricane Center is tracking two storms, one in the Gulf of Mexico and one in the Atlantic Ocean, that it reported could develop into tropical cyclones within the next two days.Front-month September reformulated gasoline blendstock, or RBOB, settled up 0.6 cents, or 0.3%, at $2.1187 a gallon. September heating oil settled 0.66 cents, or 0.3%, higher at $2.1538 a gallon.Credit: By Jerry A. DiColo