Vodafone Group PLC said Tuesday that it will sell back its interests in Japanese telecom provider SoftBank Corp. for GBP 3.1 billion ($5 billion), in the latest sign that Vodafone Chief Executive Vittorio Colao is serious about disentangling the wireless giant's sprawling portfolio.U.K.-based Vodafone, the world's biggest wireless provider by sales, acquired its interests in SoftBank in 2006 when it sold Vodafone Japan to the Japanese company, receiving payment in cash and SoftBank interests redeemable at a later date.On Tuesday, Vodafone said it will redeem those investments in two installments. It plans to use the proceeds from a GBP 1.6 billion sale next month to pare down debt. Vodafone finance chief Andy Halford said the company hasn't decided how to use proceeds of GBP 1.5 billion from a second sale set for April 2012.The announcement came as Vodafone lifted its profit forecast for the fiscal year, after reporting GBP 7.54 billion in net profit for the six months ended Sept. 30, a 56% jump. That reflects the September sale of Vodafone's 3.2% stake in China Mobile Ltd. for GBP 4.3 billion.The China Mobile sale was the first major follow-through on Mr. Colao's commitment to resolve the issue of Vodafone's minority stakes, which include shares in Verizon Wireless of the U.S., France's SFR, Poland's Polkomtel and an indirect holding in India's Bharti Airtel.On that front, Vodafone signaled that in the short term it plans to wait for the resumption of dividends from its 45% minority stake in Verizon Wireless, rather than sell the stake or merge with majority owner Verizon Communications Inc.Verizon Wireless hasn't paid dividends for five years, opting instead to service its debt, but it is expected to be debt-free by 2012. Vodafone's 45% stake in the wireless operator, valued at $50 billion or more, could bring GBP 3.5 billion in dividends a year."The current outlook is that dividends coming from future cash generation is what we expect," Mr. Colao said Tuesday. Mr. Halford, the finance chief, added that a sale of the Verizon Wireless stake would result in "a very large tax bill to pay," whereas dividends would come tax free. Mr. Halford expects a discussion on dividends in 2012.Since taking over as CEO in 2008, Mr. Colao has faced the tough task of building a future for Vodafone at a time when voice revenue is in decline in its key Western European markets. The answer, he says, is to focus Vodafone on mobile data. On Tuesday the company said it would move to a tiered-pricing model for all its data packages in Europe by March 31. Vodafone plans to base its charges on both the quantity of data consumed and the speed of delivery."We are moving to a staircase type of pricing that has a lower entry level to allow customers to adopt mobile data," Mr. Colao said Tuesday. "I am convinced this is going to be fairer and better."The move follows a trend in the wireless industry, where providers are trying to find ways to offset the slide in voice revenue, as customers with smart phones make fewer calls and instead turn to email and the Web. To make money in that environment, companies like Vodafone must become more targeted in charging for data, forcingbig datausers to pay more and eliminating generous unlimited data packages.On Tuesday, Vodafone predicted its fiscal year adjusted operating profit would be in the range of GBP 11.8 billion to GBP 12.2 billion, up from an initial forecast of GBP 11.2 billion to GBP 12 billion. It posted a 2.7% increase in adjusted operating profit to GBP 6.1 billion for the first half.It also posted better-than-expected revenue of GBP 22.6 billion for the first half, up 3.9%, the vast bulk of it from delivery of voice, data, messaging and fixed-line services. Service revenue fell 4.3% in Europe.Vodafone's shares rose 0.7% to 174 pence in London Tuesday.Mr. Halford predicted that revenue in Europe would turn positive in the early part of Vodafone's next fiscal year, which starts in April. The company is dealing with a north-south divide in its European market, with northern countries like the U.K. and Germany recovering and southern laggards like Spain and Greece showing fewer turnaround signs, Mr. Colao said.Credit: By Paul Sonne