AIRLINE MERGERBritish Airways, IberiaShareholders Approve DealBritish Airways PLC's shareholders Monday voted overwhelmingly in favor of the company's merger with Iberia Lineas Aereas de Espana SA, the final step before the carriers become International Consolidated Airlines Group SA in the new year.More than 99% of shareholders approved the deal, including those that voted by proxy, although only a handful of shareholders attended the vote as poor weather and a public-transport strike hit London.Iberia's shareholders also approved the merger Monday.British Airways Chief Executive Willie Walsh described 2010 as an "excellent year so far" for achievements, with the airline also having won antitrust immunity approval to work more closely with AMR Corp.'s American Airlines.However, some individual shareholders were more restrained about a deal that will end the full independence of one of Britain's most iconic brands.Shareholders' main complaint included the airline's plans to host future annual general meetings in Madrid, while other shareholders who were also cabin-crew members voiced their frustration over the failure to resolve a long-running industrial dispute and the significant pay raises that board members will get once the merger takes effect.-- Kaveri Niththyananthan---PORSCHEGerman Luxury Car MakerReturns to a ProfitPorsche Automobil Holding SE said Monday it swung to a 155 million euro ($205.3 million) net profit in the first three months of its fiscal year after suffering a 431 million euro loss a year earlier, and reiterated that full-year results for fiscal 2011 are expected to be profitable.The German auto maker said, however, that the last fiscal year's figures include the full consolidated earnings from Volkswagen AG and Porsche Zwischenholding GmbH, which makes a direct comparison difficult. Porsche's fiscal year started Aug. 1.In the August-through-October period, sales of the new-generation Porsche Cayenne sport-utility vehicle more than doubled year to year to 10,292 vehicles, marking the latest sign of a quick recovery in demand for luxury cars after the slump last year. The updated Cayenne was launched in May.Meantime, Porsche's new four-door Panamera coupe accounted for 5,778 sales in the first three months of the fiscal year, up 94% compared with the same period a year earlier. ---Christoph Rauwald---PERSONAL COMPUTERSGrowth in Shipments SeenSlowing Amid Tablet's RiseGartner Inc. cut its forecast of personal-computer shipments for 2010 and 2011 as consumers rein in spending and interest grows in tablet devices such as Apple Inc.'s iPad.Tablet devices are expected to displace 10% of global PC shipments by 2014, emerging as a disruptive factor for PC growth, according to the research firm.The impact of tablets is already evident this year, when PC shipments are projected to total 352.4 million units, up 14.3% from last year, according to Gartner. The group had earlier projected growth of 17.9% for this year.Next year, PC unit sales are expected to reach 409 million units, up 15.9% year to year, slower than Gartner's earlier projection of 18.1% growth."These results reflect marked reductions in expected near-term unit growth based on expectations of weaker consumer demand, due in no small part to growing user interest in media tablets such as the iPad," Gartner analyst Ranjit Atwal said in a statement.-- Benjamin Pimentel---TECHNOLOGYServer Sales Leap 15%,Signaling Jump in SpendingSales of server systems jumped 15% in the third quarter, according to research firm Gartner, a sign that large technology companies and other businesses are again spending big on tech projects.Much of the growth was fueled by new and expanding data centers, says Jeffrey Hewitt, an analyst at Gartner. In many cases, it is tech companies that sell software or host data online that are making these pushes.The kinds of servers that are used in the greatest numbers in these giant computer rooms -- and which saw the biggest sales gains during the quarter -- are those based on the x86 chip technology popularized by Intel Corp. and Advanced Micro Devices Inc."Skinless" varieties that come with some parts and casings stripped away were among the biggest gainers, Mr. Hewitt says. These servers "cut down on the cost" of running abig datacenter, he says.Hewlett-Packard Co., the largest server maker, saw revenue from those machines increase 22.5% in the quarter. Dell Inc., No. 3 in the sector, experienced even faster growth, with revenue rising 25.6% from the year-earlier period. International Business Machines Corp., the No. 2 supplier, posted a 9.9% increase, while No. 4 Fujitsu's revenue grew 5.2%.-- Ben Worthen---MERCKDrug Maker to End StudyOf Once-Daily Drug for HIVMerck andamp; Co. said Monday it will end a study of its HIV drug, Isentress, after initial results showed a once-daily dosage wasn't as effective as the standard twice-daily regimen.Merck had hoped a once-daily Isentress would be a more convenient option for HIV-positive patients who generally take multiple drugs every day. The company had expected to file for regulatory approval of the once-daily version next year but now appears unlikely to do so."We will discuss the full results of the study with regulatory agencies," said Merck spokeswoman Pam Eisele. The company plans to submit the full data for presentation at a scientific meeting in 2011.The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved Isentress in 2007 as the first of a new class of HIV drugs known as HIV integrase inhibitors, which work by interfering with the virus's ability to replicate itself.-- Peter Loftus---INTERGENChina Huaneng to BuyStake in U.S. Power FirmChina Huaneng Group agreed to buy India-based GMR Group's 50% stake in U.S.-based power-generation company InterGen for $1.23 billion, expanding Chinese investment in overseas energy assets.State-run China Huaneng Group is a major power producer with generation projects in China and abroad. InterGen operates 12 power plants with a total capacity of 8,146 megawatts in the U.K., the Netherlands, Mexico, the Philippines and Australia.GMR bought its InterGen stake from American International Group Inc. for $1.14 billion in 2008. Ontario Teachers' Pension Plan has held 50% of InterGen since 2005.-- Satish Sarangarajan---FIATCar Maker to Supply RangeOf Vehicles to GM's OpelFiat SpA on Monday announced a deal to supply a range of light commercial vehicles to Adam Opel GmbH, the German unit of U.S. car maker General Motors Co. that Fiat tried to take over in 2009.The Italian company said the initial supply will be up to 6,000 vehicles in 2011, but the total amount could reach 250,000, it added."This will extend the total lifetime production of this vehicle platform . . . to 1.3 million units," it said. Fiat didn't disclose the financial details of the deal.-- Gilles Castonguay