Japan, and not the latest mobile applications and devices, will likely be the major undercurrent to conversations held this week at the U.S. wireless industry's annual confab in Orlando, Fla.The CTIA Wireless show has long played third fiddle to the higher profile Consumer Electronics Show and Mobile World Congress trade shows, which kick off the first two months of the year with major gadget and mobile-related announcements.But this year's show will be the first gathering of major technology companies since an earthquake and subsequent tsunami struck Japan, providing a forum to weigh the impact of the disaster. Technology is intimately tied to Japan because the country is among the world's largest suppliers of components crucial to gadgets such as smartphones and computers."It'll be interesting to see what the tenor of the conference is," said Phil Asmundson, a technology consultant with Deloitte. "With the crisis in Japan, there's a lot of distractions."Japan accounted for 13.9% of all global electronic equipment revenue and one-fifth of global semiconductor production last year, according to research firm IHS iSuppli. With many chip-manufacturing facilities shut down because of aftershocks in the region, the firm said that many electronics manufacturers could potentially rush to buy up supplies.Companies are already bracing for the impact. Sony Ericsson, a joint venture between Sony Corp. and L.M. Ericsson Telephone Co., said that it expects a disruption to its supply-chain operations, and is looking at secondary sources for components."It's a global disaster with strong ties to this industry," said Avi Greengart, who covers consumer gadgets for Current Analysis.As with other major tech shows, Apple Inc.'s presence will be strongly felt, even if the company itself isn't there. Companies such as Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd., Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc. and LG Electronics Inc. will be showing off new and updated versions of their competing tablet computing devices.But the products will be immediately compared to Apple's iPad 2, which launched March 11 to much fanfare. Other technology companies, including Research in Motion Ltd. and Hewlett-Packard Co., haven't yet released their previously announced tablets."The iPad 2 is going to be an underlying theme," Mr. Greengart said. "We know that this is going to be what people are talking about."The other hot topic will be the migration to a speedier 4G wireless network. On Thursday, Verizon Wireless launched its first smartphone running on a fourth-generation network, the ThunderBolt by HTC Corp, and analysts expect the carrier to continue to drum up excitement for the service.A highlight of the show will be when the heads of the four major national carriers sit together for a round-table discussion that formally kicks off the conference on Tuesday. The carriers have traded barbs over the quality and speed of their respective networks, and have disputed their rivals' opinions on the definition of a true 4G network. Verizon Wireless recently began selling the iPhone, nullifying ATandamp;T Inc.'s largest edge. The discussion also will include Philipp Humm, CEO of T-Mobile USA, which ATandamp;T agreed to buy in a $39 billion deal announced Sunday, and Dan Hesse, CEO of Sprint Nextel Corp., which had been in talks on a combination with T-Mobile.---The Week Ahead looks at coming corporate events.---Happening This WeekMONDAYExisting home sales figures out for February.Discovery Summit for the pharmaceutical industry opens in Cannes, France.ProMat trade show for supply-chain solutions starts in Chicago.Earnings: Jaguar Mining, Tiffany.TUESDAYIPTV World Form for multiplatform TV industry begins in London.China International Petroleum andamp; Petrochemical Technology and Equipment Exhibition starts in Beijing.Earnings: Adobe Systems, Carnival, Cintas, Dollar General, Express, Harry Winston, Sonic, Walgreen.WEDNESDAYNew home sales figures out for February.Produrable conference begins in Paris, focusing on sustainable development.StructureBig Datatechnology conference takes place in New York.Earnings: General Mills, HB Fuller, Omnova, Paychex, Red Hat, Steelcase.THURSDAYInitial job claims and durable goods orders numbers due out.Convergence India begins in New Delhi for information and communication technology.Earnings: Best Buy, Charming Shoppes, ConAgra, GameStop, Oracle, Research in Motion, Saba Software, Talbots.FRIDAYCommerce Department releases data on corporate profits and GDP for the fourth quarter.The University of Michigan releases consumer sentiment data.Labor Department gives regional and state employment and unemployment numbers for February.Credit: By Roger Cheng