Silicon Valley has been edging into what some people see as bubble territory, given the clamor by investors to pour money into fast-growing Web companies such as Facebook Inc., Twitter Inc. and Zynga Inc., which has pushed up their valuations.But Greylock Partners venture capitalists David Sze and Reid Hoffman, also a founder of LinkedIn Corp., argue that is far from the case. The investors, whose firm has backed Facebook and daily deals site Groupon Inc., among others, say Silicon Valley's latest crop of Web companies have real revenue and viable business models -- unlike the dot-com companies that crashed after the 2000 tech bubble.Mr. Sze, 45 years old, and Mr. Hoffman, 43, add that all the Web activity is helping to spur a broad economic recovery here. In a reflection of their optimism, Greylock reopened its most-recent venture fund and raised an additional $425 million to invest in start-ups, for a total of $1 billion.In a recent interview at the Mountain View offices of LinkedIn, which has filed to go public, Messrs. Sze and Hoffman discussed the contours of the new Web boom and why tech engineers will always find jobs here. Excerpts:WSJ: Is Silicon Valley in a new technology bubble?Mr. Hoffman: It's not a bubble when people are claiming it's a bubble. It's only a bubble when they're not.It's a bubble when the velocity of growth and the effective business models [of start-ups] aren't sustainable. When prices are rich because the companies have massive growth and great economics behind them, that's not a bubble. If you look at the crop of companies in the growth phase now, they all have very solid economic models behind them. Some at the center of the pack have business models that could live for a long, long time.WSJ: But doesn't some of the behavior around some of the Web companies concern you, such as investors piling into private-company share deals on private exchanges?Mr. Hoffman: Generally, it's better for companies to align capital with the folks that help them build companies -- that way you have informed purchasing. So the phenomenon of doctors and dentists investing on the basis of it being a lottery is not a phenomenon that we're particularly supportive of. A lot of the capital doesn't exactly know what it's doing and that creates challenges for everyone.WSJ: So where are we in the economic cycle in Silicon Valley?Mr. Sze: I actually think we're in a pretty good place in the economic cycle here. We've got to work our way out of a large level of unemployment, but most companies are hiring. I don't know that you would have said that 12 to 18 months ago. That's not to say things are easy out there, but we're in a phase of growth for many companies and innovation is continuing and so I feel pretty positive about that.WSJ: How broad is the economic recovery in Silicon Valley? It seems limited to the consumer Web sector.Mr. Sze: We're very excited about things going on in enterprise [technology]. Companies like [enterprise software company] Workday and [security technology company] Palo Alto Networks, they're in their stride now. So on the consumer [technology] side we're enthusiastic, but we're as much cheerleaders in the enterprise side as well. We're at the wonderful point of cross where lots of technologies on consumer side are going over to the enterprise side.One example of that is [enterprise-tech company] Cloudera. It's built on a technology called Hadoop, which was initially developed at Yahoo. It's a company that applies business intelligence tobig dataproblems, all through the cloud. The founding team hails from consumer companies such as Yahoo.WSJ: And yet Silicon Valley's unemployment rate is still higher than the national average.Mr. Sze: Google hires a lot of people. If you look at companies we're involved with that are at scale, they're hiring a lot of people, whether it's Groupon or others. At the later stage, companies are hiring as many people [as before]. At the early stage, they hire fewer people, but there are a lot more start-ups being created.Mr. Hoffman: In software engineering, I think we have unlimited jobs here.WSJ: What are start-ups telling you about finding the right employees?Mr. Hoffman: That it's hard, very hard. Hiring engineering and product talent are the two [important] things. Companies say to us, hey, you have anyone for us? Everyone has the exact same top concern.Mr. Sze: For certain skills, there's infinite desire.Credit: By Pui-Wing Tam