Microsoft, BlackBerryStrike Search AllianceMicrosoft Corp. said its Bing search engine will become the default search and mapping application on Research In Motion Ltd.'s BlackBerry devices, as the companies seek to counter Google Inc.'s growing influence in smartphones..The partnership was announced Tuesday by Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer, in a surprise appearance at the BlackBerry World conference. Mr. Ballmer said Bing "will be integrated into the BlackBerry experience" by the 2011 holiday season. Details were scarce, and the companies didn't disclose financial terms.Microsoft has been trying to boost Bing's share of Web queries and reverse losses in the smartphone market. It has also struck a partnership with Nokia Corp. to use its Windows Phone software. RIM is looking for ways to counter a surge in devices running Google's Android software.-- Stuart WeinbergApps for Networking GearMakers of computer networking gear once made their products strictly off limits to outside programmers. But that mindset is changing.A start-up called Arista Networks, for example, is creating a new community to spur developers to make add-on programs for its switching devices. Rival Brocade Networks, meanwhile, is laying out a technology roadmap that includes support for new open programming schemes.The trend, though not entirely new, is accelerating and taking on more elements of the app stores popularized by Apple Inc. A major impetus is the rise of commercial data centers that exploit innovations lumped under the buzz phrase cloud computing.Arista has already let customers design add-on programs, and plans to make the process more orderly through an app store-like site for developers. "Our fundamental advantage is we can add more features more easily and more quickly than anyone," says Andreas Bechtolsheim, Arista's co-founder and chairman.Mike Klayko, Brocade's CEO, sees opportunities but he predicts operators ofbig datacenters will be cautious about deploying networking software willy-nilly. "They will test it six or eight months," he says.-- Don ClarkIMacs Get New Intel ChipsApple Inc. updated its iMac desktop computers with next-generation Intel Corp. processors and the chip company's high-speed data-transfer technology, following similar upgrades to the MacBook notebook line.The new computers -- which maintain the same pricing as the previous generation -- use Intel's Thunderbolt connection. In addition, the iMacs incorporate Intel's chips that combine processing and graphics on the same piece of silicon, making the computer up to 70% faster.-- Shara Tibken