Data-analytics company Opera Solutions LLC is set to announce its first-ever investment round, an $84 million cash injection expected to value the New York company at around $500 million, according to people familiar with the matter.Lead Investor Silver Lake Sumeru, along with Accel-KKR, Invus Financial Advisors, JGE Capital Management and Tola Capital, are putting money into Opera, which hopes to capitalize on the interest in "big data" projects that companies, governments and other large institutions use to analyze real-time information.Opera buildsbig-datacomputer systems that can suck in billions of pieces of data at once -- from home and auto prices to real-time information on brokerage accounts or supply chains. It then analyzes that data to pull out "signals" or insights about how consumers, markets and systems are behaving.Opera's clients also include Citigroup Inc. and Health Management Associates Inc. One recent project for Morgan Stanley helped that company's brokerage force make investment recommendations to clients. The full effort involves 25 billion separate computations per week, Opera officials said.In a separate project for Nissan Motor Co., Opera designed a real-time system for pricing cars, taking in millions of different data points about car auctions, looking for anomalies that could help Nissan capture higher values.Opera is one of a slate of companies large and small that are swarming thebig-datafield. International Business Machines Corp. has moved aggressively in the area, snapping up a range of small analytics firms.Hewlett-Packard Co. is remaking its entire business around the concept, jettisoning its personal-computer unit and spending $11.2 billion to buy Autonomy Corp. of the U.K. The company specializes in "unstructured data," meaning data that isn't in a database but resides inside text, video and images.Opera plans to use the new funding to build up a sales force, as well as expand its engineering force. More than half its 160 employees have Ph.Ds, according to founder and chief executive Arnab Gupta."For big corporations, the issue is not data scarcity," Mr. Gupta said in an interview. "They have too much data. What we're doing now is signal mining, actually trying to find what patterns help you take action and leave the rest alone."Credit: By Dennis K. Berman