International Business Machines Corp. agreed to buy privately held security provider Q1 Labs, accelerating the tech giant's expansion into a growing market and heightening competition with Hewlett-Packard Co. and EMC Corp.Q1, which competes against H-P's ArcSight business and EMC's RSA security division, uses analytics to detect possible security breaches, something that plays into IBM's strengths. The Armonk, N.Y., tech giant didn't disclose financial terms of the deal."We think the next level of value in security is security analytics and intelligence," Robert LeBlanc, senior vice president of IBM middleware software, said in an interview.IBM has benefited from its push toward higher-margin, complex businesses and away from crowded fields where companies can only compete on price. It has been making heavy investments in areas such as emerging countries and business analytics, and the company has said it would spend $20 billion on acquisitions from 2011 to 2015.IBM also said it was setting up a new division within the company, called IBM Security Systems, to combine Q1 with the 10 security acquisitions it has made in the past decade.Q1 Labs Chief Executive Brendan Hannigan will be joining IBM as general manager of the new group, reporting to Mr. LeBlanc. Waltham, Mass.-based Q1 was founded in 2001 and has about 1,800 customers. Mr. Hannigan declined to provide revenue or earnings details for Q1."The technology is responsible for detection of any unusual behavior," Mr. Hannigan said in an interview. "It's done in as real time as you can get."Q1 aggregates data and then analyzes the information to detect threats that would otherwise be missed. It also can help run audits and demonstrate compliance with regulations.For example, an employee could be in the office on a Saturday, running an application that allows the employee to access all of the company's customer information. If the employee doesn't normally work on the weekend or access the data at the same time, it can set off a red flag that something is wrong.Meanwhile, Intel Corp.'s McAfee security unit on Tuesday said it was buying NitroSecurity, another company that uses analytical tools to identify and resolve threats within minutes. The company said the deal will allow it to give organizations greater visibility into security threats and vulnerabilities across their entire information technology environment.CLSA analyst Ed Maguire said in a recent note that security is a "big data" problem, with massive amounts of information needing to be cleaned and analyzed in order to identify correlations and provide insights related to threats."The future of cybersecurity is information management--how to organize, correlate and analyze data effectively," he said.Write to Shara Tibken at shara.tibken@dowjones.comCredit: By Shara Tibken