Data-analytics consulting company Mu Sigma Inc. said it has raised $108 million from venture capitalists, marking one of the largest investments in the fast growing analytics business.Mu Sigma helps some of the world's biggest corporations make sense of the vast amounts of data being produced online. The company, which is headquartered in Chicago with most of its analysts in Bangalore, employs about 1,500 people, up from about 1,200 in June.The latest funding round was led by General Atlantic, with Sequoia Capital, a current investor, raising its stake. Sequoia had invested $25 million in Mu Sigma in June. The valuation set by the latest fundraising wasn't disclosed.Part of the new money will be used to buy shares back from existing shareholders, although Mu Sigma isn't saying how much of the money will go toward that purpose.Founder and Chief Executive Dhiraj Rajaram said Mu Sigma is profitable and will also use the new money to find new customers and develop more services for its current ones.Mu Sigma, founded in 2004, has now raised $150 million. Mr. Rajaram said he isn't planning to raise more money and that an IPO is a possibility. Other investors in Mu Sigma include FTV Capital.The company specializes in problems involving marketing, supply chain and risk analytics across nine industries."We believe we are painting on a very large canvas," Mr. Rajaram said. "There cannot be any business that will not be impacted by analytics and decision science."The company hires people who have attended the best schools in India or the U.S. and puts them through a three-month training program called Mu Sigma University that teaches the basics of consulting, applied math, data modeling and statistics.These employees then help Mu Sigma's corporate clients learn to use the data their companies are generating to run their businesses more effectively.Mu Sigma claims more than 50 Fortune 500 clients--it has helped a pharmaceutical company identify the best price points for drugs, and a cable company identify the best ways to retain customers and still make money, it said.More than 100 Mu Sigma employees are devoted to working with various parts of Microsoft Corp., which was Mu Sigma's first customer.One Microsoft manager, Jason Hoffman, Microsoft's senior director of monetization for paid search, said Mu Sigma helps Microsoft rapidly shift resources to solve problems in online advertising, a field where conditions can quickly change.For instance, Mu Sigma helped Microsoft model the combined search-advertising marketplace for Microsoft and Yahoo Inc. (Microsoft and Yahoo are online advertising partners)."I think the fact thatbig dataexists and that companies like Mu Sigma have appeared is an indicator of larger changes on the horizon for companies in spaces that have to compete based on that data," Mr. Hoffman said.He added that Mu Sigma's training course is providing a level of expertise not generally available, even in most universities. "We're not graduating a lot of these folks, and it concerns me deeply," Mr. Hoffman said.As part of the new funding, General Atlantic Chief Executive Bill Ford will join Mu Sigma's board. Mr. Ford said the firm can help Mu Sigma with introductions to global customers."We can get [Mu Sigma] in front of the CEO or other senior business leader, Mr. Ford said. "CEOs get it, but they have to be educated on what a company like Mu Sigma can do."Credit: By Deborah Gage