Ben Rooney writes the Tech Europe blog on WSJ.com. This is his first weekly column for The Wall Street Journal Europe.What are the technology trends of 2012 likely to be? I polled some of The Wall Street Journal Europe's Tech Leaders Group, a panel of 25 of Europe's most senior and respected technologists, for their advice and suggestions for what 2012 would bring for new technology.They were asked to make technology predictions for 2012 with three sets of odds: something that is pretty certain; predictions that are rather more risky, and finally ones that are a complete wild card.The "taken as read" prediction is the rise of "cloud computing," which allows consumers to store data, and run apps from, remote servers on the Internet. No prizes for saying that it will continue to grow in importance, nor that providers will continue to push it at every turn.Most of the "no threat to your credibility" predictions centered around mobile. Ilja Laurs, chief executive of GetJar Inc., expects to see Android, Google Inc.'s mobile operating system, eclipsing Apple Inc.'s iOS in 2012 as the platform of choice for developers. He also suggested that Android would continue to fracture, and handset makers may go as far as to make their own versions of it.Niklas Zennström, CEO and founding partner of Atomico and a Skype co-founder, believes that "Android will start to monetize its platform more effectively, benefiting users and developers alike. At the moment, Android users are considerably less likely than iPhone users to spend money on their phone. We expect this to start changing."2012 is also likely to see smartphones transformed into electronic wallets, thanks in part to a technology known as "near field communication," or NFC, according to Turkcell CEO Sureyya Ciliv. This contactless communications technology has bubbled away slowly for years but faces a Catch-22: Retailers won't support it without NFC-enabled devices; device makers won't add NFC without retail support.The impetus is likely to come from operators, such as Turkey's Turkcell, which see it, along with other mobile payment systems, as an additional revenue stream.Still on the subject of mobile, Windows Phone, Microsoft Corp.'s tardy entrance into the space, has divided respondents. Mr. Laurs predicts that for 2012 "Nokia finally starts shipping significant [Windows Phone] volumes," while Oliver Bussmann, chief information officer of SAP AG, is a lot more circumspect.There also was caution expressed over the fourth-generation mobile networks known as long term evolution, or LTE. Jass Sarai, U.K. technology leader at PwC, made a hesitant bet. "4G takes off in a big way, albeit maybe 2012 is a bit premature."Likewise, Ben Verwaayen, CEO of Alcatel-Lucent, put LTE in his "cautious" category, suggesting that "LTE will become the wireless technology to adopt in Europe, influenced by adoption in North America and China." Both Messrs. Sarai and Verwaayen's reluctance to back LTE for 2012 is understandable given the size of the market today and the slowness of some European states in holding spectrum auctions."Big Data"--the ability to acquire, store, process and use vast quantities of data, often in real (or close to real) time--is also a key trend. Microsoft International President Jean-Philippe Courtois puts the impact ofBig Dataon health care in his "medium risk" category. "The more data you can collect, the more accurate your predictions will be. This has huge implications for the health-care industry...and in making that prediction accurately, a hospital can adjust its resources, or even recommend a different course of treatment.Big Datais set to completely change the way we deliver health-care services."In a different, though parallel, category, Allianz Group Chief Information Officer Ralf Schneider suggests 2012 will see strides in "in-memory data management," which will pave the way for real-time enterprise computing. As the name suggests, databases are held in memory, not on disk, which significantly reduces the read time.Mr. Verwaayen, among others, suggests the introduction of different methods of interacting with our devices. He is confident that "natural speech-to-text communications for 'on-the-go' communications and social networking will become the norm, following Apple's lead with Siri." Exclusive to the iPhone 4S, Siri, a voice-activated personal assistant, helps users check the weather or find restaurants, among other things.Meanwhile, Mr. Courtois, albeit as his "long odds" prediction, says pervasive displays--low-power, high-resolution e-paper technology--will sit at the heart of our digital lives, suggesting that "ubiquitous and seamless connectivity will mean that wherever we are we'll have access to our most important information." He also hints at something that Microsoft is working on: "The ultimate pervasive display...is a kind of a magic window, potentially as big as a wall in your house, which would allow people from different locations to interact as if standing on opposite sides of a giant pane of glass."Finally, Mr. Verwaayen takes credit for the most outrageous pair of predictions, outlandish almost to the point of folly. His "chancing your luck" category included: "Goal-line technology will be implemented by FIFA" and "Arsenal to win a trophy of some sort." As if.Credit: By Ben Rooney