Big Data--the ability to collect, process and interpret massive amounts of information--is one of today's most important technological drivers. While companies see it as a way of detecting weak market signals, one of the biggest potential areas of application for society is health care.Historically, health care has been delivered by one doctor looking at one patient with only the information the doctor has at that time. But how much better if the doctor had access to information about thousands, or even tens of thousands, of people?Acquiring medical data has, historically, been problematic. It is wrapped in layers of regulations and stringent safeguards and is expensive to collect.It is also not representative of the general population, for the problem with health care is that only ill people use it. If you want to know what is going on in the general population ill people aren't terribly useful; they are, after all, ill.So while the health services can already collect information from laboratories, hospitals and front-line doctors, the nature of the data is problematic, says Shamus Husheer, CEO of Cambridge Temperature Concepts. "It is massively skewed. It is highly biased by the people who go to doctors; the ill, the hypochondriacs and the elderly."Mr. Husheer's company makes a product designed to help women with fertility problems conceive. Women wear a sensor 24 hours a day which records movement and changes in body temperature (an indication of ovulation), up to 20,000 readings a day. This is valuable medical data.Because women using his product report anything that might affect their body temperature, "it allows us to build up profiles of illnesses without ever setting foot in a hospital," Mr. Husheer says. "More importantly we can see what those illnesses look like in the general population who are otherwise normally healthy. People who have a cold don't go to the doctor. Where else are you going to get that data?"Because the recordings continue while the women are asleep, "for the first time, we also have extensive data on what normal sleep looks like," he said.What this gives researchers is a huge control group. "You can compare sleep patterns from normal people with, say, pain sufferers. If you don't know what normal sleep looks like, how do you tease out the data?"Getting patients to share data isn't always that easy, says Chris Edmonds, managing director of Replay Digital, a company specializing in medical smartphone apps which has recently built an app targeting asthma sufferers. In return for sharing information, sufferers get advice on how to control their condition. The more people who use the app, the more anonymized, aggregated data can be built up about asthma sufferers whose condition isn't bad enough to require medical intervention.But there is an implicit deal that has to be struck. If a sufferer is going to use an app, they have to get something back in return. "Most patients are pretty noncompliant," Mr. Edmonds says. "You can't just collect data from them."Mr. Edmonds was dismissive of the idea of "gamification"--so that suffers of chronic conditions would get some kind of reward; say, measure your temperature four times in a week and unlock a badge to post on social networks."This idea about people wanting to play a game about their condition makes no sense whatsoever," he said. "If I am not going to measure my symptoms because it is good for me and makes my bowel cancer better, am I really going to do it to unlock a badge for Facebook?"Kaveh Safavi, who leads Accenture's health practice for North America, saysbig datagives two benefits to clinicians. First is "the ability to see information across time in ways that aren't possible."The second is to begin the process of pattern recognition, particularly when you are looking for low frequency events, or things that where the signal is very small and might not be discernible when looking at very small groups," he says. A well known example of this is the ability for Google to track the progress of flu through looking at search terms.There is a problem. Medical data are subject to very stringent conditions on sharing and storage. It took Mr. Husheer nearly two years to get clearance from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Is there a danger that the regulatory framework is going to impede the benefits that can be accrued?It is a risk to which the U.K. government is alert. As one of the few countries to provide a "cradle to grave" health system, the U.K. has access to some of the most detailed and complete patient information. Some of that patient data are to be made available. "We will consider how best to achieve an appropriate balance between the protection of patient information and the use and sharing of information to improve care," said a U.K. Department of Health spokesperson.A huge upside of technology has been its democratization, giving ordinary access to information and tools that had previously been the preserve of the few. Industry after industry has seen the creative destruction wreaked upon it as Internet technologies pull down walls.Health care has, so far, remained relatively unscathed. For how much longer?Credit: By Ben Rooney