The big hype aroundBig Datais getting a reality check.For years, technologists have predicted that software that makes it easier and cheaper to analyze vast amounts of data would revolutionize business. One of the hottest contenders is Hadoop, a much-discussed variety of software that sprang from developments at companies that include Google Inc. and Yahoo Inc.Hadoop, which comes in free versions under what the industry calls an open-source license, aims to lower costs by storing data in chunks across many inexpensive servers and storage systems. The software can help speed up certain types of simple calculations by sending many queries to multiple machines at the same time.The technology has spawned a set of new start-ups, such as Hortonworks Inc. and Cloudera Inc, which help companies implement it.But some early adopters of Hadoop now say using the technology is challenging and rolling it out will take time.Roger Liew, chief technology officer of travel-search company Orbitz LLC, says the company turned to Hadoop in 2009 to store more data about how customers use its site at less than a tenth of what it was paying. With Hadoop, Orbitz can now store all the results it generated for a given search query--even ones it didn't show--instead of storing only what search results it showed a user. That makes it easier for Orbitz to personalize its site for users.But "the software isn't easy to work with," Mr. Liew says, partly because it requires that engineers deploy software across lots of different servers, which can be more challenging than loading and updating software on one. "I believe in the power of it, but you have to adopt it eyes wide open."Switching to Hadoop also isn't always cheaper in the end, says Vladimir Boroditsky, a director of software engineering at Motorola Mobility Holdings Inc., which uses Hadoop to store data transmitted from devices being tested in the field, along with more traditional data-storage systems. He says the company only uses Hadoop for data that are difficult to store elsewhere because of the volume.Mr. Boroditsky says Hadoop is "immature" and comes with additional costs of hiring in-house expertise and consultants. "There is a very substantial cost to free software," he says, declining to comment on dollar figures.Still, demand for companies that help businesses implement Hadoop appears to be rising. Mike Olson, chief executive of Palo Alto-based Cloudera, says customers and revenue have doubled in the past year, though he declined to give figures.Mr. Olson says Hadoop is being held back by the lack of software applications that companies can use in conjunction with it to make the data they are storing useful. "We need to see a proliferation ofbig data-analysis applications," he says."Hadoop is like taking an aspirin for a broken leg," says Stephen Messer, co-founder of Collectivei, because it helps companies store large amounts of data but doesn't help them with certain types of processing. His new start-up sells cloud-based software that helps companies determine what data are relevant for analyzing their customers, eliminating the need to store lots of data that may turn out to be worthless.Rob Bearden, CEO of Hortonworks in Sunnyvale, says the impulse to store lots of data because it can be cheap can lead to storing too much and make answering simple questions harder. "You want to have some sort of control over what data you push into an application," he says. "Otherwise, your juice isn't really worth the squeeze."Hortonworks, founded last year with investments from Yahoo and Benchmark Capital with Yahoo's Hadoop technology, plans to expand beyond a few dozen "beta" customers this year.Write to Jessica E. Vascellaro at jessica.vascellaro@wsj.comCredit: By Jessica E. Vascellaro