Intel formally issued the specs Tuesday on its new Xeon E5 processor, a chip designed for use in the servers ofbig datacenters. It is impressive, with an 80 percent improvement in processing power. You can read about the specs from Intel and from The Register, a news site specializing in hardcore tech issues.As much as processing power, what came through just as clearly in Intel's announcement is how much Intel's world has changed. Intel makes great technology, but it faces new competitors, new alliances, and new ideas about computing. In this regard, the Xeon announcement also told a sometimes desperate and defensive story about Intel's competitive landscape.Information technology "is transforming itself again," said Diane Bryant, Intel's vice president for servers, "it transforms itself every six years. There's nothing new here." At times of great change, incumbents often say nothing is really changing.The reality of Intel's presentation, however, is that processing, long Intel's strong suit, is now just one more feature, alongside technology to enable twice the bandwidth throughput, enhanced security and energy management. Intel said the E5 offers better capability in all these, and can also be used as a chip in servers, data storage, and networking.The reason Intel stresses the other features, of course, is the boom in things like mobile devices, social networking, and Internet-connected data centers. The great growth in the industry is in cloud computing, the centerpiece of this information explosion. Intel was trend compliant at Tuesday's announcement, starting its press conference with the now familiar cloud-related litany of mind boggling statistics, including projections that by 2015, 15 billion devices and 3 billion people will be connected to the Internet. (Other facts from Intel made less sense, as far as computers are concerned: is there really some connection between a cloud server and the human brain's ability to hold 10 terabytes of information?)Unfortunately for Intel, another fact is that computer servers for the cloud will soon be found with cell phone chips. The speed of transactions matter just as much as pure semiconductor processing power. Hence the Intel chip enables managers to balance data throughput with power consumption, depending on the need. Cloud architecture makes it hard to tell where computing ends and storage or networking begin, so Intel is positioning the E5 as a chip that can do it all. If so, that could make it attractive in big computer centers. Change always makes people nervous about security, and the E5 can encrypt data at a rate of 39.7 gigabits a second, about the amount of data in an animated feature film. All worthy things, and not what Intel has needed to sell this hard before.Alliances are changing fast in the industry too; last week Advanced Micro Devices said it would pay $334 million for SeaMicro, a maker of so-called microservers for the cloud. On Tuesday Ms. Bryant said that Intel also had a chance to buy SeaMicro, but passed. "I don't think there were very many they didn't show it to," she said. "We were not impressed." In January, however, Intel called SeaMicro a leader in this field, and cohosted a meeting proclaiming SeaMicro.The real issue for Intel, where the Xeon E5 is concerned, may be how well it can work with its traditional allies, and find some new strong partners for this chip. In addition to the usual computing customers, Intel is aiming the Xeon for servers inside telecommunciations clouds. Dell and Hewlett-Packard got nods from Intel, but both of these companies face their own new competitive challengers from cheap producers of servers. Both companies now talk about their technology in the context of an overall system that can outperform less-sophisticated producers.Whether that value-added argument of their's works will have much to do with Intel's own success.This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.