SAS Institute, the world's largest private software company, has built its lucrative business by being the pioneer of sophisticated data-analysis tools. SAS software, down to its own programming language, is used by most large corporations for things like detecting credit card fraud for banks and fine-tuning pricing for retailers.But the data-analysis game is democratizing. New kinds of data are part of the trend, as Web and social-networking messages join all the information in corporate databases as grist of decision making. But so are new tools, opening data-analysis to a wider audience of corporate users, not just elite teams of Ph.D. quants in Fortune 500 companies.SAS is making its bid on Thursday to grab a share of the widening market for data-analysis tools with a new product, SAS Visual Analytics. It takes mountains of data from structured corporate databases or Web sources, and presents it as easy-to-read charts, graphs and data maps. It can be accessed by mobile workers via a browser on their notebook PCs or through an iPad application.The new user tool is delivered from SAS software that runs on an industry-standard blade server, with the hardware typically supplied by partners, Hewlett-Packard and Dell. It exploits the latest in very fast data-handling technology - so-called in-memory processing. That is, data is explored and sifted in a computer's memory almost instantly as opposed to having to retrieve information from a storage disk, which delays the response.The move by SAS, according to Dan Vesset, an analyst at IDC, shows that the company is keeping pace in technology for in-memory processing and user-friendly, visual software for users.  Its new product, Mr. Vesset said, is meant   to "appeal to the new generation of analysts and data scientists."SAS, based in Cary, N.C., faces plenty of competition from large companies in the field like I.B.M., Microsoft and MicroStrategy as well as smaller companies and start-ups including QlikTech, Tableau Software and ClearStory Data.The goal, simply put, is to create the equivalent of the spreadsheet forBig Data.The SAS advantage, said Jim Goodnight, founder and chief executive, will be in bringing its leading-edge technology to more corporate managers. "No one has the predictive analytic tools that we have," Mr. Goodnight said. "And we can handle much, much larger data than anyone else."This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.