The world's stock of information is exploding. But the world's biggest database company isn't in a great position to capitalize on that.At a customer conference in Tokyo last week, Oracle President Mark Hurd noted how digital information is growing exponentially, from 1.8 zettabytes last year to an expected 35 zettabytes in 2020. If an 11-ounce cup of coffee represented one gigabyte, according to a Cisco Systems report, then one zettabyte would have the same volume as the Great Wall of China. Everything from digital videos to emails to health records is fueling this.But it turns out that much of this information is best processed not by an Oracle database but by cheap hardware and open-source software. One problem is scale. As data pile up, companies must expand systems quickly to handle this. Another problem is complexity. Much of the data can't be easily categorized by traditional databases organized in rows and columns: Tweets don't really fit a spreadsheet."Big Data" is the shorthand to describe this trend. Google faced the ultimateBig Dataproblem years ago, needing to index most of the Internet for its search engine. Doing so required a huge database to make sense of mountains of complex data. Google solved the problem by building a giant system using cheap hardware and internally developed software.Many other companies are solving theBig Dataproblem in a similar fashion to Google. They are taking cheap servers and installing free, open-source software like NoSQL. They are also using free software called Hadoop to analyze the data they are collecting. Hot start-ups are releasing their own flavors of the free software and selling service contracts to companies that want support. As with Red Hat, which built a business selling a supported version of the open-source Linux operating system, 10gen sells a popular, supported version of the NoSQL database. Companies such as Cloudera and MapR sell supported versions of Hadoop.The problem for software giant Oracle is that it is trying to solve the problem with hardware. TheBig Data"appliance" it sells can link to Oracle's existing database software, but it mostly runs open-source software like NoSQL and Cloudera. And it is much more expensive than commodity hardware.Oracle still sells quality database software that remains the standard for handling data that is easily categorized--customer records, for instance, or transaction information. But that business isn't growing quickly. After backing out the impact of currency fluctuations and acquisitions, Cowen andamp; Co. estimates that the revenue from new license sales of Oracle database software has grown at an average annual rate of less than 2% for the past four years.No one ever got fired for buying IBM, it is said. Similarly, some may buy Oracle'sBig Dataappliance for peace of mind. But in the long run, cheaper technology should win the day.Write to Rolfe Winkler at  rolfe.winkler@wsj.comCredit: By Rolfe Winkler